                The shaded areas of the map indicate ESCAP members and associate members.*

The Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP) is the most
inclusive intergovernmental platform in the Asia-Pacific region. The Commission
promotes cooperation among its 53 member States and 9 associate members in
pursuit of solutions to sustainable development challenges. ESCAP is one of the five
regional commissions of the United Nations.

The ESCAP secretariat supports inclusive, resilient and sustainable development
in the region by generating action-oriented knowledge, and by providing technical
assistance and capacity-building services in support of national development
objectives, regional agreements and the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.

* The designations employed and the presentation of material on this map do not imply the
expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Secretariat of the United Nations
concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or
concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
        SIGN LANGUAGE

WHAT IS IT?

   An ESCAP Guide towards Legal Recognition of
         Sign Languages in Asia and the Pacific
iv  SIGN LANGUAGE

    Acknowledgments

    Sign Language: What Is It? An ESCAP Guide towards Legal Recognition
    of Sign Languages in Asia and the Pacific was prepared by the Social
    Development Division (SDD), United Nations Economic and Social
    Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP), under the overall leadership
    and guidance of Srinivas Tata (he/him), Director, SDD. Cai Cai (she/
    her), Chief of Gender Equality and Social Inclusion Section (GESIS), SDD,
    supervised the research, drafting and illustration team.

    Co-authors of this publication:
            Yutaka Osugi (he/him, Deaf), Professor, National University Corporation
            of Tsukuba University of Technology, Tsukuba, Japan;

            Yuenwah San (she/her), Hon. Senior Advisor on Disability Inclusion, SDD,
            ESCAP;

            Aiko Akiyama (she/her), Social Affairs Officer, GESIS, SDD, ESCAP;

            Ikumi Kawamata, (she/her, Deaf), Programme Officer, True Colors, Global
            Issues Team, Global Issues, The Nippon Foundation.

    Rachel McKee (she/her), Associate Professor at the School of Linguistics and
    Applied Language Studies, Victoria University of Wellington, New Zealand,
    undertook technical editing of the initial manuscript.

    Peer reviewer:
            Anthony Alexander Vee Yee Chong, PhD (he/him, Deaf), Co-Founder-
            cum-Secretary, Malaysian Sign Language and Deaf Studies Association
            (MyBIM), Malaysia.

    Illustrator
            Tomoka Kawai (she/her, Deaf), Independent Illustrator.

    Designer
            Marie-Ange Sylvain-Holmgren (she/her), Founder and Creative Director,
            Image Ark.

    Chinese-English Document Translator
            Zian Cao (he/him), GESIS, SDD, ESCAP.

    Administrative Assistant
            Juraporn Sinlapharojanapanich (she/her), Public Information Assistant,
            (GESIS), SDD, ESCAP.
WHAT IS IT?                                                                         v

Preliminary research assistants:
        Anjaly Sheela Kumar (she/her) and Constanze Rebekka Huenting (she/
        her), former ESCAP interns.

We are grateful for the encouraging words by:
        Yohei Sasakawa (he/him), Chairman, The Nippon Foundation;
        Clarissa U Ka Weng, Director, World Federation of the Deaf Regional
        Secretariat for Asia (WFDRSA);
        Krishneer Krishneer Sen (he/him), Chairperson, World Federation of the
        Deaf Regional Secretariat for Oceania (WFDRSO).

Numerous well-wishers contributed to the myriad details that went into
producing this publication. While it is not feasible to name everyone, we
extend warm thanks to the Deaf persons whose stories are in the box items
for sharing their lived experiences and photos. We are deeply grateful to
the many individuals whose contributions in one way or another enabled us
to have access to information and photos, including those who facilitated
contacts.

In addition, the contributions of the following are also much appreciated.

Bangladesh:
        Nazmul Bari (he/him), Centre for Disability in Development

China:
        China Association of the Deaf and Hard of Hearing
        MA Xingcan (she/her), China Braille Press
        ZHAO Shukun (she/her), South-West China University
        LIU Yijun (she/her), Wuhan East-Lake Institute for Social Advancement
        Grace YAO Di (she/her), China Disabled Persons' Federation
        Jiayi Zhou (she/her, Deaf), Deaf Association, Hongkou District, Shanghai
        Ka Yiu CHENG (he/him), The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
        Hong Kong, China

Fiji:
        Fiji Association of the Deaf

Pacific Disability Forum:
        Setareki Seru Macanawai (he/him)
        Angeline Chand (she/her)
        Paradise Tabucala (she/her)

India:
        Andesha Mangla, PhD (she/her, Hard of Hearing), Indian Sign Language
        Research and Training Centre
        Anjlee Agarwal (she/her), Samarthyam, National Centre for Accessible
        Environments
        Thakur D. Dhariyal (he/him), Centre for Accessibility of Built Environment
vi  SIGN LANGUAGE

    Indonesia:
            Laura Lesmana Wijaya (she/her), University of Indonesia
            Antoni Tsaputra, PhD (he/him), Universitas Negeri Padang

    
    Japan:

            Yasuo Hyugaji (he/him), Waseda University

    Mongolia:
            Dulamsuren Jigjid (she/her), Culture Centre of the Deaf

    Nepal:
            Shudarson Subedi (he/him), Disability Human Rights Promotion Society

    Republic of Korea:
            Ohyong Kweon (he/him), Korean Alliance for Mobilizing Inclusion of
            people with psychosocial disabilities (KAMI)

    Sri Lanka:
            Brayan Susantha Kodithuwakku (he/him), Sri Lanka Central Federation
            of the Deaf

    Thailand:
            Thai Telecommunication Relay Service (TTRS)

    World Federation of the Deaf Regional Secretariat for Asia
            Clarissa U Ka Wen (she/her)

    World Federation of the Deaf Regional Secretariat for Oceania
            Krishneer Sen (he/him)

    We also wish to acknowledge the support of all the bilingual sign language
    interpreters who facilitated communication in numerous meetings held in the
    course of co-creating this sign language guide.

    This publication was made possible with generous funding support from The
    Nippon Foundation.
WHAT IS IT?                                                                   vii

Copyright © United Nations 2022
All rights reserved
Printed in Bangkok
ST/ESCAP/3048

Disclaimer

This publication may be reproduced in whole or in part for educational or
non-profit purposes without special permission from the copyright holder,
provided that the source is acknowledged. The ESCAP Publications Office
would appreciate receiving a copy of any publication that uses this publica-
tion as a source. No use may be made of this publication for resale or any
other commercial purpose whatsoever without prior permission. Applications
for such permission, with a statement of the purpose and extent of reproduc-
tion, should be addressed to the Secretary of the Publications Board, United
Nations, New York.
viii        SIGN LANGUAGE

  Acronyms

ASL      American Sign Language
AUSLAN   Australian Sign Language
BIM      Malaysian Sign Language
Bisindo  Indonesian Sign Language
BSL      British Sign Language
CRPD     Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
DET      Disability Equality Training
ESCAP    Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific
EU       European Union
ICF      International Classification of Functioning, Disability
         and Health
ICT      Information and communications technology
ISL      Indian Sign Language
JSL      Japanese Sign Language
LSF      French Sign Language
NZSL     New Zealand Sign Language
OPD      Organization of persons with disabilities
SDG(s)   Sustainable Development Goal(s)
UN       United Nations
WHO      World Health Organization
WASLI    World Association of Sign Language Interpreters
WFD      World Federation of the Deaf
WFDRSA   World Federation of the Deaf Regional Secretariat for Asia
WFDRSO   World Federation of the Deaf Regional Secretariat for Oceania
WHAT IS IT?                                                                         ix

Foreword

From 1993, through three consecutive regional decade initiatives, ESCAP has
promoted disability rights and disability-inclusive development in Asia-Pacific.

What has been a hallmark of ESCAP's Decade efforts?
· Galvanizing the power of the disability community for self-help, and

     for voicing issues to engage more effectively in policymaking and
     implementation.
· For this, organizing forums in which Governments and representative
     organizations of persons with diverse disabilities discuss issues on par with
     each other.

Representatives of Deaf communities have been actively participating in
ESCAP forums.

Their voicing of issues is not audible. Delegates attending intergovernmental
meetings have seen articulation by Deaf advocates using sign language, and
noted the critical intermediary role of sign language interpreters for meaningful
dialogue with the Deaf advocates.

ESCAP forums gave many government delegates their first experience of Deaf
persons discussing issues through the use of sign language. Such exposure
has driven home the invisibility of Deaf persons in their own societies.

Many more delegates and government officials have had the opportunity to
learn that there does not exist one sign language that all Deaf persons use
on a daily basis; instead, there are many sign languages. Just as there are
numerous spoken languages.

It is well over a decade since the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities was adopted in 2006. The landmark human rights treaty established
a solid foundation for the Deaf community's advocacy for legal recognition of
sign languages.

To "walk the talk" of disability rights, in 2019, the United Nations Secretary-
General launched the United Nations Disability Inclusion Strategy to
mainstream disability perspectives into all the work of all United Nations
x                               SIGN LANGUAGE

   entities. Enabling the meaningful and effective participation of Deaf persons,
   including through the provision of International Sign interpreting not only at
   disability meetings but also in meetings on mainstream matters, is a new vision
   that we in the United Nations system ought to work towards realizing.

   Soon, we shall conclude the third Asian and Pacific Decade of Persons with
   Disabilities, 2013-2022. As we reflect on our collective responsibility and our
   individual contributions to making the right truly real for 700 million persons
   with disabilities in Asia and the Pacific, it is time for us to dispel "myths" about
   sign languages and to promote legal recognition of sign languages.

   ESCAP is pleased to present this publication to underscore its commitment to
   realizing the vision of enabling the effective and meaningful participation of
   Deaf persons in Asian and Pacific societies.

   In this journey, we at ESCAP are deeply appreciative of the role of The Nippon
   Foundation. This is not only because of its funding contribution to the creation
   of this guide, but also because of its substantive contribution in an intensive
   creative process: its Deaf staff member, with the ESCAP team, as well as a Deaf
   consultant author and a Deaf illustrator, have been working together for over a
   year on this publication, fuelled by the hope of making a difference in the lives
   of Deaf persons in Asia and the Pacific.

   I am delighted to commend this guide, particularly as I am motivated to learn
   more about sign languages and am learning American Sign Language (ASL).
   Learning sign language has opened up an exciting new horizon that enriches
   understanding of new dimensions of non-spoken language and Deaf culture.

   Standing with Deaf communities in the Asian and Pacific region, ESCAP
   presents this sign language awareness guide as a key for unlocking a door to
   genuinely inclusive and rights-based societies for all persons with disabilities,
   particularly Deaf persons.

   Srinivas Tata
   Director
   Social Development Division
   United Nations ESCAP
WHAT IS IT?                                                                          xi

Special Message

One World, One Family. This basic philosophy guides The Nippon
Foundation's work, pushing us to transcend the borders of politics, religion,
race, national borders, disability and gender. Among all of our activities,
we put particular effort into supporting persons with disabilities, providing
aid throughout Japan and in 48 other countries. Around the world, persons
with disabilities have consistently had to face unfair hurdles in education
and employment, but we are striving to overcome that history and to build
inclusive societies where persons with disabilities have more choices, can
make their own decisions, and can enjoy independence and participation in
society.

For people who are deaf and hard-of-hearing, we aim to achieve societies
that place sign language on par with spoken language; societies in which sign
language enables active participation. To do this, The Nippon Foundation
supports the establishment of schools where Deaf children can use sign
language to learn, and encourages the study of sign language, by including
it alongside other languages such as Spanish or Chinese in the curricula of
higher education institutions.

Given the recognition of sign language as a language by the Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities, as well as the increasing legal recognition of
sign languages worldwide, this guide has been prepared in close collaboration
with ESCAP. The purpose of the guide is to promote understanding of sign
language and of people who are deaf and hard-of-hearing in Asia and the
Pacific. It is our hope that this publication will contribute to the development
of policies that promote full participation and equality in the countries and
territories that it reaches.

The defining thrust of the SDGs is "Leave No One Behind." In line with this,
many more now accept legal recognition of sign language as a global standard.
Against this background, this guide seeks to explain, among others, the status
of legal recognition of sign languages in Asia-Pacific and the key legislative
elements required of governments to ensure that Deaf persons are not left
behind and are able to participate fully in society.

We hope that this guide is useful in efforts to promote legal recognition of sign
language and in achieving the full and equal participation of Deaf and hard-of-
hearing persons in all aspects of society.

Yohei Sasakawa
Chairman
The Nippon Foundation
xii           SIGN LANGUAGE

     Joint

     Congratulatory

     Message

     On behalf of the World Federation of the Deaf Regional Secretariat for
     Asia (WFDRSA) and the World Federation of the Deaf Regional Secretariat
     for Oceania (WFDRSO), we thank The Nippon Foundation and the United
     Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP) for
     the tremendous support given to the important development of a guide that
     helps raise awareness of sign language and its legal recognition in Asia and
     the Pacific.

     The World Federation of the Deaf has 131 Ordinary Members, with 70 million
     Deaf and Hard-of-hearing people around the world. Many Deaf communities
     in the ESCAP region are struggling to get their sign languages recognized in
     policy and in law. This affects our access to important areas, such as education,
     health and employment, for our meaningful participation in society.

     We are at a critical juncture for ensuring the legal recognition of sign languages
     in the ESCAP region. Out of 131 Ordinary Members of the World Federation
     of the Deaf, there are 17 Ordinary Members in Asia: Bangladesh; China;
     Democratic People's Republic of Korea; Hong Kong, China; India; Indonesia;
     Iran (Islamic Republic of); Japan; Macau, China; Mongolia; Nepal; Pakistan;
     Philippines; Republic of Korea; Singapore; Sri Lanka and Thailand.

     For the Pacific, there are four Ordinary Members: Australia, Fiji, Samoa and
     New Zealand.

     In the Asian and Pacific region, New Zealand was the first country to have a
     national sign language-specific law, thus setting a benchmark for others in the
     ESCAP membership. Similarly, the Philippines and the Republic of Korea have
     legally recognized their respective national sign languages.

     We are confident that this guide will be a useful resource for Government
     policymakers, Deaf communities, organizations of persons with disabilities,
     media agencies and other stakeholders in advancing sign language recognition
     at the local, community, national and regional levels in Asia and the Pacific.
WHAT IS IT?                                                                     xiii

This publication will increase understanding of the importance of legal
recognition of sign language and related policies for enabling Deaf and Hard-
of-Hearing persons in the ESCAP region to make their dreams come true and
lead better lives.

It is our hope that this guide will expedite the implementation of the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the achievement of
the Sustainable Development Goals with regard to sign language and Deaf
culture in Asia and the Pacific.

We heartily congratulate The Nippon Foundation and the United Nations
Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific for producing this
landmark guide and look forward to its significant impact on Asian and Pacific
Deaf communities.

U Ka Weng, Clarissa            Krishneer Sen
Director                       Chairperson
World Federation of the Deaf   World Federation of the Deaf
Regional Secretariat for Asia  Regional Secretariat for Oceania
(WFDRSA)                       (WFDRSO)
xiv                                            SIGN LANGUAGE

     CONTENTS

     Acknowledgments                                          iv

     Disclaimer                                               vii

     Acronyms                                                 viii

     Foreword                                                 ix

     Special Message                                          xi

     Joint Congratulatory Message                             xii

     Introduction                                             2

     Chapter 01: Lifting the Veil over Sign Language          5

     Chapter 02: Sign Language: When, What, How?              21

     Chapter 03: Deaf Culture                                 45

     Chapter 04: Language Acquisition in Deaf Childhood  55

     Chapter 05: Deaf Education                               67

     Chapter 06: Sign Language Interpretation                 75

     Chapter 07: Legal Recognition of Sign Language           101

     Conclusion149

     References150

     Annexes                                                  153
Box items

Box 1. Deaf man in business: "Deaf Can Do Investment," Michael Noa              16

Bete Din, social entrepreneur, Fiji                       

Box 2. Deaf woman artisan-cum-entrepreneur, Ledua Lauti, Fiji                   17

Box 3. Deaf pharmacy owner, Mohamed Zahir Mohamed Amjeth,                       18

Sri Lanka

Box 4. Gain, Not Loss: personal journey of Ikumi Kawamata, Deaf              24
          officer, The Nippon Foundation, Japan                                

Box 5.   The Asian SignBank, The Chinese University of Hong Kong,              40
           Hong Kong, China                                                   

Box 6. For Deaf older persons, a home that is a sanctuary: Deaf              42
           community initiative, Japan                                         

Box 7.   The beauty of sign language through art: multilingual Deaf woman     51

artist, Jiayi Zhou, China                                                     

Box 8. Sign Language: a tool for inclusive education                           61

Box 9. Deaf educator, Sibaji Panda, Director, Happy Hands School for         64

the Deaf, India                                         

Box 10. Vitalizing Deaf sports: Deaflympian and physical education               73

teacher of Deaf children, Elvira Ligay, Uzbekistan                            

Box 11. Telephone relay service / remote interpreting service, Thailand         91

Box 12. Training legal practitioners for Chinese Standard Sign Language        94

proficiency, China                                                           

Box 13. Deaf woman dentist-cum-Advocate, Juniati Effendi,               114
           Dentist, Indonesia 

Box 14. Sign Language Act: A tale of vision, perseverance and tenacity        127
           -11 years of the Korea Deaf Association's bottom-up and top-down

           advocacy campaign for the Korean Sign Language Act

Box 15. Deaf participation in local government, Atsuko Yanetani, City       148

Council Member, City of Akashi, Hyogo Prefecture, Japan                       

Tables

Table 6.1 The Sign Language Interpretation Certification System in Japan       87

Table 7.1 Disability references in the SDGs                                   109

Table 7.2 Three types of legislation that recognize the importance of

         sign language                                                        122

Table 7.3 Key elements of legislative provisions                              132
2  SIGN LANGUAGE

   Introduction

   According to the World Federation of the Deaf (WFD) estimate, there are over
   70 million Deaf people in the world. More than 80 per cent of them live in
   developing countries. Collectively, Deaf people use more than 200 different
   sign languages.

   The new normal of the COVID-19 pandemic has wrought many changes. One of
   these is the greater reliance on online communication in place of face-to-face
   communication. Another is the importance of regular, at times daily, pandemic
   updates via social media, news agency apps/websites, online portals and TV
   broadcasts. Breaking news and important press briefings on the pandemic
   broadcast on TV are often accompanied by one of these options: only
   captions, only sign language interpretation, or captioning and sign language
   interpretation. Which of these options meets the minimum requirement for
   keeping the majority of Deaf persons informed? Which is the optimal option?

   Famously, in the universe of United Nations deliberations on human rights
   and persons with disabilities, sign language has been recognized as a valid
   language in the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities adopted
   by the United Nations General Assembly in 2006. That recognition was a "first"
   in the history of human rights conventions.

   On 19 December 2017, the United Nations General Assembly, via its resolution
   72/161, proclaimed 23 September as International Day of Sign Languages. We
   might have noticed Deaf communities marking events this International Day.
   But, do we understand its significance? How does such recognition benefit
   Deaf people?

   Moreover, some people use the word "deaf" with a lower case "d," while
   others capitalize the first letter to "Deaf." What is the difference between the
   two? Is it only Deaf people who benefit from using sign language?

   The World Health Organization (WHO) estimates that, by 2050, over 700 million
   people ­ or one in every 10 persons ­ will live with a disabling hearing loss, with
   the prevalence of hearing loss increasing with age. Among those older than
   60 years, over 25 per cent are affected by disabling hearing loss. That makes
   a practical case for learning sign language as part of life-long preparation for
   old age.

   This guide attempts to provide clues, if not answers, to questions such as those
   raised above. It seeks to debunk common myths that many hearing people
   have regarding sign language, as well as informing readers about institutional
   measures and legal actions for enabling the realization of the right of Deaf
   persons to communicate in sign language.
WHAT IS IT?                                                                            3

For this, the structure of this guide departs somewhat from standard United
Nations publications. It uses a question-and-answer format. Readers may start
with any question. The following seven chapters cover 27 questions:

CHAPTER 1: LIFTING THE VEIL OVER SIGN LANGUAGE
CHAPTER 2: SIGN LANGUAGE: WHEN, WHAT, HOW?
CHAPTER 3: DEAF CULTURE
CHAPTER 4: LANGUAGE ACQUISITION IN DEAF CHILDHOOD
CHAPTER 5: DEAF EDUCATION
CHAPTER 6: SIGN LANGUAGE INTERPRETATION
CHAPTER 7: LEGAL RECOGNITION OF SIGN LANGUAGE

The target audience includes policy makers, parliamentarians, educators,
employers, as well as decision-makers and influencers among private sector,
civil society and international organization personnel.

Groups that are representative of the Deaf community may use this guide to
enhance self-awareness and a shared sense of Deaf community identity.

Civil society organizations and groups, in partnership with Deaf persons,
could use this guide to pursue advocacy for deeper and more widespread societal
understanding and acceptance of sign languages as valid languages for daily use.

Private sector entities could apply the information in this guide to strengthen
the inclusion of Deaf persons in their work force.

Policy makers could initiate action to facilitate the full participation and equality
of Deaf persons.

It is hoped that this guide may serve as a handy reference source for a whole
of-nation approach to promoting sign language use at all levels.
4  SIGN LANGUAGE
WHAT IS IT?                     5

                       CHAPTER

    01

          LIFTING
        THE VEIL
     OVER SIGN
     LANGUAGE

Q1. What is sign language?
6  SIGN LANGUAGE

   Q1.WHAT IS SIGN LANGUAGE?

   1.3 Definition of sign language

   Sign languages are natural languages used primarily by Deaf people. The
   Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities identifies language
   as "spoken language, signed language and other forms of non spoken
   languages."1 Spoken languages are communicated by speaking and hearing,
   while signed languages are communicated through the use of hands, face and
   vision.

   Out of the world's total population of about 7.8 billion people2, how many are
   sign language users? The World Federation of the Deaf (WFD) is an international
   civil society organization that acts as a peak body for 133 national associations
   of Deaf people who use sign languages. There are over 200 documented sign
   languages in the world.3

   The 70 million deaf people worldwide represent 0.008 per cent of the world'
   population.

   In the Asia-Pacific region, at least 27 sign languages are used in the same
   number of countries and territories that are affiliated with the WFD4.

   Note that, throughout this guide, "deaf" with a lower case "d" is used when
   referring generically to all persons with impaired hearing, while `Deaf' with
   capitalized "D" is used when referring to those who communicate in sign
   languages on a daily basis and identify with a Deaf community. The former
   usage reflects an audiological perspective and the latter denotes a linguistic
   and cultural perspective.5

   1 United Nations General Assembly, 2006.

   2 United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, 2019.

   3 https://wfdeaf.org/our-work/

   4 Afghanistan; Armenia; Australia; Azerbaijan; Bangladesh; China; Fiji; Georgia; Hong Kong, China; India; Indonesia;
   Iran (Islamic Republic of); Japan; Kazakhstan; Macao, China; Malaysia; Mongolia; Nepal; New Zealand; Pakistan;
   Philippines; Republic of Korea; Singapore; Sri Lanka; Tajikistan; Thailand, and Uzbekistan.

   5 The `d/Deaf' distinction is under reconsideration by Deaf Studies scholars who argue that it may be artificially
   binary, however we retain the capitalized form of Deaf in this document in acknowledgement that members of sign
   language communities typically claim `Deaf' as a label that promotes recognition of their cultural identity.
WHAT IS IT?                                                                           7

1.3 What does the Convention on the Rights of
       Persons with Disabilities say about sign 
       language?

The Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (also referred to as
the Convention) represents "a paradigm shift from a medical to a political
and social focus in the work to secure the freedom and dignity of persons
with disabilities. Attitudinal and environmental barriers, not the physical
impairment, prevent persons with disabilities from enjoying full human rights;
for Deaf people the major barrier is lack of recognition, acceptance and use of
sign language in all areas of life, and lack of respect for Deaf people's cultural
and linguistic identity."6

The Convention, with its human rights emphasis, makes seven specific
references to sign language or some aspect of it. In that regard, States parties
shall take all appropriate measures to ensure that persons with disabilities
can exercise their right to freedom of expression and opinion, including the
freedom to seek, receive and impart information and ideas on an equal basis
with others and through all forms of communication of their choice, including
the use of sign languages. States parties must facilitate the learning of sign
language and the promotion of the linguistic identity of Deaf communities,
including sign languages and Deaf culture. To realize these obligations in line
with the Convention, the Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
has urged States Parties to take appropriate measures to employ teachers,
including teachers with disabilities, who are qualified in sign language and to
train professionals and staff members who work at all levels of education.7

Since its establishment on 23 February 2009, the Committee has consistently
included the official recognition of sign languages and access to sign
language interpretation in its constructive dialogues with States parties
and in several concluding observations.8 In addition, the right to access
sign language interpretation and services is particularly highlighted in the
Committee's General comments9 No. 1 on equal recognition before the law;
No. 2 on accessibility; No. 5 on inclusive education; No. 6 on equality and
non-discrimination; and No. 7 on the participation of persons with disabilities,
including children with disabilities, through their representative organizations,
in the implementation and monitoring of the Convention.

Below are the seven specific references that appear in four Articles of the
Convention10, namely:

        Article (Art.) 9 on Accessibility, para. 2 (e);
        Article 21 on Freedom of expression and opinion, and access to
        information, paras. (b) and (e);
        Article 24 on Education, para. 3 (b) and para. 3 (c);
        Article 30 on Participation in cultural life, recreation, leisure and sport,
        para. 4.

6 Haualand, H and C. Allen, 2009.

7 United Nations Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, 2018.

8 Ibid.

9 United Nations Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.

10 United Nations General Assembly, 2006.
8  SIGN LANGUAGE

   Article 9, Accessibility

   1. To enable persons with disabilities to live independently and participate
       fully in all aspects of life, States Parties shall take appropriate measures
       to ensure to persons with disabilities access, on an equal basis with
       others, to the physical environment, to transportation, to information and
       communications, including information and communications technologies
       and systems, and to other facilities and services open or provided to the
       public, both in urban and in rural areas. These measures, which shall include
       the identification and elimination of obstacles and barriers to accessibility,
       shall apply to, inter alia:

   ...

   2. States Parties shall also take appropriate measures:

          Article 9, para. 2. e

           To provide forms of live assistance and intermediaries, including
           guides, readers and professional sign language interpreters, to facilitate
           accessibility to buildings and other facilities open to the public;

   Article 21, Freedom of expression and opinion, and access to
   information

           States Parties shall take all appropriate measures to ensure that persons
           with disabilities can exercise the right to freedom of expression and
           opinion, including the freedom to seek, receive and impart information
           and ideas on an equal basis with others and through all forms of
           communication of their choice, as defined in article 2 of the present
           Convention, including by:

          Article 21, para. b

           Accepting and facilitating the use of sign languages, Braille,
           augmentative and alternative communication, and all other accessible
           means, modes and formats of communication of their choice by persons
           with disabilities in official interactions;
           ...

          Article 21, para. e

           Recognizing and promoting the use of sign languages.

   Article 24, Education

   1. States Parties recognize the right of persons with disabilities to
        education. With a view to realizing this right without discrimination and
        on the basis of equal opportunity, States Parties shall ensure an inclusive
        education system at all levels and lifelong learning directed to:

   ...
WHAT IS IT?                                                                             9

3. States Parties shall enable persons with disabilities to learn life and
     social development skills to facilitate their full and equal participation in
     education and as members of the community. To this end, States Parties
     shall take appropriate measures, including:

...

       Article 24, para. 3. b

        Facilitating the learning of sign language and the promotion of the 
        linguistic identity of the deaf community;

       Article 24, para. 3. c

        Ensuring that the education of persons, and in particular children,
        who are blind, deaf or Deafblind, is delivered in the most appropriate 
        languages and modes and means of communication for the individual, and
        in environments which maximize academic and social development.
        ...

       Article 24, para. 4

        In order to help ensure the realization of this right, States Parties shall
        take appropriate measures to employ teachers, including teachers
        with disabilities, who are qualified in sign language and/or Braille,
        and to train professionals and staff who work at all levels of education.
        Such training shall incorporate disability awareness and the use of
        appropriate augmentative and alternative modes, means and formats
        of communication, educational techniques and materials to support
        persons with disabilities.

Article 30, Participation in cultural life, recreation, leisure and
sport
...

       Article 30, para. 4

        Persons with disabilities shall be entitled, on an equal basis with others,
        to recognition and support of their specific cultural and linguistic identity,
        including sign languages and deaf culture.

        ....

Thus, there is reference to sign language in all Articles of the CRPD that
mention "communication" or "language." The CRPD provides a powerful
tool to enhance the human rights of people with disabilities and the above-
mentioned Articles highlight the basic parameters for protecting the human
rights of Deaf people.11

11 Haualand, H. and C. Allen, 2009.
10                                SIGN LANGUAGE

    1.3 Ten common myths about sign language

    MYTH 1: There is only one sign language; everyone around the
                 world uses the same sign language.

    Sign language is not universal. As with spoken languages, different sign
    languages a re used in different countries. For instance, compare signs
    in the phrase "My name" in Indian Sign Language (ISL), Indonesian Sign
    Language (Bisindo), Japanese Sign Language (JSL), and New Zealand Sign
    Language (NZSL).

              Figure 1.1                           Figure 1.2
    Indian Sign Language (ISL)    Indonesian Sign Language (Bisindo)

                 Figure 1.3                        Figure 1.4
    Japanese Sign Language (JSL)  New Zealand Sign Language (NZSL)

    These signs <I> share a common feature of pointing at one's body with a finger
    or hand, while other signs <NAME> have very different form in each language.
    Note that even within a single sign language, there are variants, or dialects,
    depending on region, age-group, and other social characteristics, as found in
    spoken languages.

    At international events, such as conferences and sports competitions, we often
    see Deaf people from different countries communicating effectively with each
    other. This scene may mislead hearing people to believe that there is one
    universal sign language. In fact, they may be using a sign language that they
    both know, or adopting a means of communication called International Sign.
WHAT IS IT?                                                                             11

The WFD describes International Sign "as a pidgin form of sign language,
which is not as conventionalized or complex as natural sign languages and has
a limited lexicon."12

                                                     Figure 1.5
                                  International Sign for "I" and "name"

MYTH 2: There is only one sign language for those who 
              communicate in the English language.

If two countries have the same spoken language, it is often assumed that
they have the same sign language. This is not always the case. For example,
Australia, the United Kingdom and the United States use English, but the Deaf
communities in these three countries use completely different sign languages,
namely, Australian Sign Language (Auslan), British Sign Language (BSL) and
American Sign Language (ASL), respectively.

Here are some examples of words that mean `people' in each sign language
used in Australia, the United Kingdom and the United States.

           Figure1.6                             Figure 1.7               Figure 1.8
Australian Sign Language                 British Sign Language  American Sign Language

            (Auslan)                                (BSL)                    (ASL)

. 12 World Federation of the Deaf, 2019
12                                                                                    SIGN LANGUAGE

    MYTH 3: Sign language is inferior to spoken language and is not
                 a "proper" language with grammar and syntax.

    Sign language is not just a combination of hand gestures, but a language with
    a vocabulary and grammar that is highly developed from hand gestures. The
    details are contained in Chapter 2.

    Many linguists have worked with sign languages and there is a common
    understanding that sign languages are in no way inferior to spoken languages.

    MYTH 4: Fingerspelling is sign language.

    Fingerspelling is one of the components of sign language; it is a system in which
    the letters of a spoken language are represented by fingers. Fingerspelling is
    used in different ways in different sign languages. Normally, fingerspelling is
    used to spell people's names. It is also used to borrow words from the spoken
    language and follows the original spelling of those borrowed words.

    Not all sign languages have a manual alphabet, but each sign language that
    does, has its own manual alphabet, even where their surrounding cultures
    make use of the same written alphabet. For instance, American Sign Language
    (ASL) and British Sign Language (BSL) are used alongside the same written
    language, but use two totally different manual alphabets. ASL uses a one-
    handed alphabet, while BSL uses a two-handed alphabet.

                 Figure 1.9.                  Figure 1.10.
    Finger Spelling for UN in ASL  Finger Spelling for UN in BSL

    Three Indian researchers, F. Amal Jude Ashwin, V. Srinivasa Chakravarthy and
    Sunil Kumar Kopparapu, have developed a novel and unified fingerspelling
    system known as Mudrabharati for 10 major Indic scripts. The gestures of
    Mudrabharati are constructed based on the phonetics of the Indian scripts
    and not the geometry of the glyphs that compose the individual characters.
    Unlike ASL that utilizes just one hand, Mudrabharati uses both hands - one for
    consonants and the other for vowels. Swarayukta aksharas (Consonant-Vowel
    combinations) are gestured by using both hands. An artificial intelligence (AI)-
    based recognition system has been developed that can convert a video of a
    signer using Mudrabharati into running text in Devanagari and Tamil scripts.13

    13 F. Amal Jude Ashwin, V. Srinivasa Chakravarthy, and S. Kumar Kopparapu, 2021.
WHAT IS IT?                                                                                                             13

It should be noted that fingerspelling is only a part of sign language and does
not equal sign language.

Some people draw a parallel between fingerspelling for Deaf users with Braille
for Blind users. For more information on the difference between fingerspelling
and Braille, see Chapter 2.

MYTH 5: Sign language is a word-for-word direct interpretation of
              spoken language.

Many hearing people assume that signed sentences follow the word order of
spoken sentences. Sometimes this is true, but often the syntax differs. While
spoken languages mainly use speech, sign languages make full use of not
only the movement of the hands and arms, but also facial expression, head
movement, body orientation and the space around the sign language user, to
achieve a grammatical structure that is reliant on vision. Details are contained
in Chapter 2.

MYTH 6: Sign language is too basic for conveying complex 
             concepts.

This is a false statement. In communities where Deaf people who use sign
language gather, they discuss in sign language the factors that prevent Deaf
people from participating in society.

In developing countries of the ESCAP region, despite enormous challenges,
a small number of Deaf persons have completed research and acquired
Ph.Ds. In certain universities, Deaf professors use sign language to teach
classes and to present their research. For example, at Tsukuba University
of Technology in Japan, Deaf professors teach Deaf and Hard of Hearing
students in sign language, while at another university, hearing students learn
through sign language interpreters in classes conducted in sign language by
a Deaf professor.

The global mecca of Deaf higher education is Gallaudet University in the U.S.A,
the only higher education institution in the world in which all programmes
and services are specifically designed to accommodate Deaf and Hard of
Hearing students. Gallaudet University embraces bilingualism: it uses ASL and
written English for instruction and on-campus communication14. The Carnegie
Classification of Institutions of Higher Education15 has classified Gallaudet
University in the category of "Doctoral Universities ­ High research activity."

Furthermore, the fact that there are Deaf lawyers and legislators who work
by talking through sign language interpreters disproves the notion that sign
language is too basic for conveying complex concepts.

14 Gallaudet University.

15 The Carnegie Classification is a framework for classifying colleges and universities in the United States. The
framework primarily serves educational and research purposes for which it is often important to identify groups of
roughly comparable institutions. The classification includes all accredited, degree-granting colleges and universities
in the United States that are represented in the National Center for Education Statistics Integrated Postsecondary
Education Data System (IPEDS).
14  SIGN LANGUAGE

    MYTH 7: A Deaf person can understand you, if you speak slowly
                 and loudly.

    This depends on various factors, the:

           · Degree of hearing ability that exists in the ears (without hearing aids);
           · Degree to which hearing is supported by hearing aids or cochlear

                implants;
           · Extent to which training has enabled the hearing of speech.

    Even if a deaf person is agreeable to having vocal communication, it is not
    necessary to speak slowly and loudly. Instead, the speaker should simply
    vocalize speech in the same way as done with other hearing persons. This
    means that it is important to speak at a speed that is neither artificially fast nor
    slow and to do so in an environment where there is minimum noise disturbance.

    MYTH 8: Deaf persons must learn to speak and lip-read.

    Why is this a `must'?

    It is a transgression of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
    to attempt to force Deaf children, young persons and adults to speak and
    lip-read.

    It is the right of each Deaf person to choose whether or not to learn how to speak
    and lip-read. Public awareness of this right is covered under Art. 8, Awareness-
    raising, in the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. Art. 8
    recognizes the ned to foster respect for the rights and dignity of persons with
    disabilities, including Deaf persons, in addition to stating the right to learn and
    use sign language, and to access the services of sign language interpreters.16

    MYTH 9: Writing is the best way to communicate with a Deaf
                 person.

    Signed languages do not have a conventional written form. Researchers have
    developed systems for writing and notation to document the details of signs.
    However, these are not generally used in the Deaf community because they
    are not easy to read and write. A very small number of people use SignWriting,
    a writing system developed by Valerie Sutton in the 1970s.

    The present level of technology allows for sign language to be easily
    documented and shared via video format, including by using mobile phones.
    Sign languages will therefore most likely continue to be used for interpersonal
    and wider communication, without a print-based writing system.17 Deaf
    persons tend to use the written form of the spoken language(s) of their country,
    according to their respective levels of literacy. However, childhood deafness
    presents obstacles to acquiring literacy in a spoken language.

    16 See in particular the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, Art. 8; Art. 9, para. 2 (e); Art. 21, para
    (b); Art. 24, para 3(c); and Art. 30, para 4.
    17 Ethnologue.
WHAT IS IT?                                                                         15

MYTH 10: Only "deaf mutes" or the "deaf and dumb" use sign
               language.

The term "deaf mute" is a term with derogatory connotations that is commonly
used by hearing people to refer to Deaf persons. Similarly, "deaf and dumb" is
in the same derogatory category of terms commonly used by hearing people
who do not understand that use of these terms seriously undermines the
dignity and rights of the Deaf community and reinforce injustice against Deaf
persons.

It is not only Deaf people who use sign language. Hard of Hearing people also
use sign language. Below is the WHO definition of the two types of hearing
loss:18

        "Hard of hearing' refers to people with hearing loss ranging from mild
        to severe. People who are hard of hearing usually communicate through
        spoken language and can benefit from hearing aids, cochlear implants,
        and other assistive devices as well as captioning.

        `Deaf' people mostly have profound hearing loss, which implies very
        little or no hearing. They often use sign language for communication."

The above WHO definition notwithstanding, in reality, there are many Hard of
Hearing people who use sign language. Ultimately, each person has to make
a personal decision whether to use sign language as the language of choice
in daily life.

Factors that may lead to hearing loss include genetic factors, ageing-related
factors, exposure to loud sound, infections, side effects of certain types of
medication. The above article then notes the universal prevalence of hearing
loss:

        "Over 5 percent of the world's population ­ or 430 million people ­
        require rehabilitation to address their `disabling' hearing loss (432
        million adults and 34 million children). It is estimated that by 2050 over
        700 million people ­ or one in every ten people ­ will have disabling
        hearing loss."

Furthermore, some Deafblind people have learned to use sign language as
their main language.

Sign language interpreters, family members, teachers at schools where deaf
children study, and staff members at facilities where Deaf people gather use
sign language for interacting with Deaf people.

18 WHO, 2021.
16

    Box 1. "Deaf Can Do Investment," Michael Noa Bete Din
    (he/ his), social entrepreneur, Fiji

                                                           Michael Noa Bete Din, popularly known as "Noa," is a
                                                           Deaf Fijian. Noa learned how to run a Deaf organization
                                                           during his participation in a year-long (2009-2010) "Duskin
                                                           Leadership Training in Japan19" programme. Since
                                                           returning to Fiji, Noa has been involved in the management
                                                           of the Fiji Association of the Deaf, having also participated
                                                           in Pacific disability leadership-related training. Noa is
                                                           now in charge of public relations and supports the sports
                                                           activities of the Association.

                        Photo: Michael Noa Bete Din,       In 2019, Noa launched a new business, "Deaf Can Do
    Fiji Association of the Deaf, an OPD member            Investment." There are five employees: Noa, three Deaf
                                                           persons,a person with speech impairment, and a Fijian
                        of the Pacific Disability Forum    Sign Language interpreter. They all share the workload of
             Photo source: Pacific Disability Forum        providing services such as car washing, lawn mowing, and
                                                           house cleaning, to the residents of Suva.

    In 2020, the "Deaf and Do" initiative established a car wash service based in the Fiji Vocational
    Technical Training Centre for Persons with Disabilities (FVTTC)20, Suva. Under its arrangement
    with the FVTTC, "Deaf Can Do" trains, each month, two FVTTC students, especially Deaf
    students, to support their learning of employment etiquette in the car wash service.21

    Prior to the second wave of the COVID-19 pandemic, the "Deaf Can Do" arrangement with the
    FVTTC included its use of the FVTTC canteen for selling hot drinks and pastries on Saturdays.
    The Saturday canteen business wound up with COVID-19-related lockdown and health
    restrictions.

    The "Deaf Can Do Investment" is incorporated as a business entity. It has been successfully
    sustained with the assistance of the National Council for Persons with Disabilities (NCPD)22, Fiji
    Disabled People's Federation (FDPF)23 and the FVTTC.

    The "Deaf Can Do Investment" is a successful example of a business venture that the Fiji
    Association of the Deaf has supported its members in establishing.

    19 Duskin Leadership Training in Japan.

    20 Established in 1979; the Fiji Vocational Technical Training Centre for Persons with Disabilities, (FVTTC) services include provision of the following:
    vocational training for young people with disabilities and special needs above the age of 14; courses ­ carpentry and joinery, agriculture, computer,
    book binding, sewing, cooking, horticulture and short courses on skill training; skill job training programmes; job placements; transportation for
    those with severe disabilities. Source: National Directory and Information for Disability Services, Version. 2020, p. 29.

    21 Based on email communication (28 October 2021) from Mr Setareki Macanawai, CEO, Pacific Disability Forum, and ESCAP Champion, Asian and
    Pacific Decade of Persons with Disabilities, 2013-2022.

    22 The NCPD has 32 organizations affiliated with it. Its functions include, inter alia, the following: serve as a coordinating body for all organizations
    dealing with the care and rehabilitation of persons with disabilities; seek financial assistance from government and aid donors for itself and regis-
    tered organizations providing service to persons with disabilities; assist in the training, education and rehabilitation of persons with disabilities; cre-
    ate public awareness of the problems and the aspirations of persons with disabilities regularly inform the Government of the problems and needs of
    persons with disabilities and seek solutions to such needs.

    23 The FDPF is a national cross disability organization which is led and managed by persons with disabilities. Its four major affiliates are: Fiji Associa-
    tion for the Deaf (FAD); Psychiatric Survivors Association (PSA); Spinal Injury Association (SIA); United Blind Persons of Fiji (UBP). FDPF is a founding
    member of the Pacific Disability Forum, a partnership of Pacific organizations of and for persons with disabilities, that is the voice for Disabled
    Peoples' Organizations in the Pacific. The functioning and delivery of results of the FDPF are closely aligned with the Convention on the Rights of
    Persons with Disabilities.
                                                                                                                                                                        17

Box 2. Deaf woman artisan-cum-entrepreneur, Ledua Lauti
(she/her), Fiji

                                                                                                                                       Photo: Ledua Lauti
                                                                                                         Photo source: Fiji Association of the Deaf

Ledua Lauti, an artisan and mother, is also a member of the Fiji Association of the Deaf. Ledua works
with Deaf peers to make and sell Fijian artisanal handicrafts. From coconut and pandanus leaves,
they make fans, mats, bags, jewellery and neck ornaments (e.g., salusalu, a traditional lei made of
natural fibres) for traditional Fijian costumes. Ledua upcycles scrap fabric from a garment factory
into hand-knotted door mats for sale. For making her craft items, Ledua uses the raw material from
pandanus that she grows outside her home. In a typical pre-pandemic week, Ledua could make up
to 40 baskets in a range of sizes.
Ledua inherited the handicraft skills from her mother. In turn, Ledua teaches the handicraft skills
to Deaf peers and to students at the School for the Deaf. With the decline of the tourism business
during the COVID-19 pandemic and reduced handicraft sales in hotel outlets, Ledua and her Deaf
peers are working on their customer base through online sales.
Ledua learned online marketing from two other members of the Fiji Association of the Deaf who
used social media to sell homemade jam and clothes sewn at home. Ledua now posts photos of her
craft items on her Facebook account. Her clients include individuals and Suva Handicraft Market
vendors. They send her their orders via Facebook Messenger.
Fiji's Constitution guarantees the right of people with disabilities to use sign language. Through
campaigns in conjunction with the observance of International Deaf Week and International Sign
Languages Day, the Fiji Association of the Deaf advocates with the Government and legislators for
the enactment of a sign language law.
18

       Box 3. Deaf pharmacy owner, Mohamed Zahir Mohamed Amjeth
       (he/him), Sri Lanka

                                                                                            Photo: Mohamed Zahir Mohamed Amjeth (Amjeth) serving customers
                                                                                                                   Photo source: Mr Mohamed Zahir Mohamed Amjeth

          Mohamed Zahir Mohamed Amjeth (Amjeth) was born in Matara, in the south of Sri Lanka, the
          son of a pharmacy owner. At the age of three, Amjeth lost his hearing. The family believed it
          was the side effect of vaccination. Amjeth attended the Ceylon School for the Deaf & Blind,
          near Colombo, a long distance from his parents' home. Established in 1912, this is the oldest
          educational institution for Deaf and Blind children in Sri Lanka. Amjeth lived in a boarding house
          and remembers that while some of the teachers could sign, some only used spoken language,
          mainly Sinhala.

          When school was not in session, for example during the summer vacation, Amjeth would return
          to his parents' home in Matara. From the age of 10, his father shared with Amjeth his knowledge
          of medicines. As soon as Amjeth graduated from school at the age of 16, he started working
          with his father in the family's pharmacy. Although Amjeth is not a formally qualified pharmacist
          himself, he uses the knowledge he gained from his father and his self-taught English to help
          customers at his father's pharmacy.

          Amjeth manages well in communicating with his customers mainly through writing in Sinhala or
          English. Amjeth's regular customers accept his deafness and trust his knowledge of medicines.
          Amjeth sees himself as a competent Deaf person who can understand the common symptoms
          presented by his regular customers who come to the pharmacy for their supply of medicines.
          Amjeth communicates with his hearing family through the Matara version of Sri Lankan Sign
          Language.

          In 2004, Amjeth's pharmacy was completely destroyed by the Indian Ocean earthquake and
          tsunami. With the help of a network of pharmacies across Sri Lanka, especially in Colombo,
          Amjeth's pharmacy was rebuilt and continues to function today as a hub for providing medicines
          to the people of Matara District. Amjeth hopes that his own children will take over from him the
          pharmacy that he has inherited from his father.
WHAT IS IT?  19
20  SIGN LANGUAGE
WHAT IS IT?                                                        21

                     CHAPTER

   02
              SIGN
   LANGUAGE:
WHEN, WHAT,

            HOW?

      Q1. When in recorded history did sign language emerge?
      Q2. Is sign language made up only of hand gestures?
      Q3. How are sign languages different from spoken languages?
      Q4. Is sign language a universal code like Braille?
      Q5. Do Deafblind persons use sign language?
      Q6. Are there dictionaries of sign languages?
      Q7. What research exists on sign languages in Asia-Pacific?
22  SIGN LANGUAGE

    Q1. WHEN IN RECORDED HISTORY
    DID SIGN LANGUAGE EMERGE?

    Sign language is likely the first form of language that preceded all the spoken
    languages of ancient civilizations. Humans have been able to communicate
    using language for at least 50,000 years24. According to the speculation of some
    anthropologists, the first language was "a series of gestures and pantomimes"
    --- which may be understood as the uninformed hearing person's perception
    of sign language.

    The answer to this question draws thus far only from research of recent
    centuries. There does not, as yet, appear to have been research conducted
    into sign language in the ancient river valley civilizations of the Nile (Egypt),
    Tigris/Euphrates (Mesopotamia), Ghaggar25 and Indus (India and Pakistan), the
    Yellow River and the Yangtze (China), as well as the civilizations of the Iranian
    plateau, and of Central America (Mexico and Guatemala) and Latin America
    (Peru, Chile and Bolivia).

    The earliest recorded literature available to us that mentions sign language can
    be traced back to ancient Greece. In Plato's (427-347 BC) "Cratylus," Socrates
    (470-399 BC) is reported to have said:

            "If we had no faculty of speech, how should we communicate with one
            another? Should we not use signs, like the deaf and dumb? The elevation
            of our hands would mean lightness ­ heaviness would be expressed by
            letting them drop. The running of any animal would be described by a
            similar movement of our own frames...."26

    This early literature suggests that there were Deaf people who used sign
    language or highly developed gestural systems in ancient times.

    Most Deaf persons, especially in urban or rapidly urbanizing parts of Asia-
    Pacific, are not born to Deaf parents or into a community of signers. In that
    context, the existence of groups of Deaf people is necessary for a sign
    language to develop and be transmitted from one generation to the next.
    Whenever Deaf people form a group and communicate on a regular basis,
    shared signs naturally emerge. Depending on the size and continuity of the
    group, this may remain a more rudimentary communication system or it may
    develop over time into a sign language with a full-fledged vocabulary and
    grammar. The most common environment for the formation of a larger and
    ongoing Deaf community is a school for Deaf persons and its graduates.
    The first public school for Deaf children27 was founded in Paris in the 1750s.

    24 Akorbi, 2020.
    25 Subramaniam, T.S., "Rakhigarhi, the biggest Harappan site," in The Hindu, May 19, 2016, 12:00 IST. https://www.
    thehindu.com/features/friday-review/history-and-culture/rakhigarhi-the-biggest-harappan-site/article5840414.ece.
    26 https://www.gutenberg.org/files/1616/1616-h/1616-h.htm
    27 Institut National de Jeunes Sourds de Paris (National Institute for Deaf Children of Paris) is the name of the school
WHAT IS IT?                                                                                                           23

French Sign Language (now known as LSF) developed at this school and, with
a history of about 270 years, is thought to be the oldest. From LSF, many other
sign languages, such as American Sign Language, have been derived and
developed in their own ways.

In Asia and the Pacific, depending on when schools for Deaf persons were
established and whether they were led by educators from other countries (often
the former colonial powers), the sign language that has evolved is either unique
to a country or has been influenced by other sign languages. An example of
the former is Deaf schools established by the Japanese Government during its
rule of the Korean Peninsula and Taiwan, China. An example of the latter is the
involvement of British Deaf persons in education in Australia and New Zealand
during its establishment in the nineteenth century.

In isolated villages on islands or in mountainous areas where hereditary
deafness resulting from consanguineous marriage means that the population
of Deaf people tends to increase, indigenous sign language unique to the
remote geographical area has been observed. In the Asian and Pacific region,
such observations have been made in India, Indonesia, Japan, Nepal, Papua
New Guinea, Thailand and Türkiye.28

for Deaf children founded in Paris by Charles-Michel de l'Épée, in stages, between 1750 and 1760.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Institut_National_de_Jeunes_Sourds_de_Paris

28 See Panda, S. (2012). "Alipur Sign Language: A sociolinguistic and cultural profile," pp. 353- 360, and Connie de
Vos and Zeshan, U. (2012), "Introduction: Demographic, sociocultural and linguistic variation across rural signing
communities," p. 2, in Zeshan, Ulrike, and Connie de. Vos. Ibid..
file:///C:/Users/Admin/Downloads/9781614511496.pdf.
24

       Box 4. Gain, Not Loss
       Personal journey of Ikumi Kawamata (she/her), Deaf Programme
       Officer, The Nippon Foundation, Japan

          I became Deaf when I was three years old as a result of a high fever. In describing this to others,
          I try not to say "I lost my hearing." The phrase "lost hearing" or "cannot hear" may certainly be
          easily understood by most hearing people who are unfamiliar with Deaf persons and Deaf culture.
          However, its focus is on what I lost or what I can no longer do. I would rather see it as a turning
          point in my life. Contrary to loss, I have "gained" and "become able to do many things" through
          my unique perspective and identity as a "Deaf person." In this regard, my first language, as a Deaf
          person, is Japanese Sign Language, with which I believe I am able to contribute to society as a
          member of society. That is why I say "I became Deaf."

                                           Ikumi Kawamata (holding a Japanese flag) with international Deaf peers at Gallaudet
                                                                University, Washington D.C., on the occasion of her graduation.2013
                                                                                                                   Photo source: Ikumi Kawamata

          That being said, until high school, I attended local hearing schools in Japan and I did not try to learn
          Japanese Sign Language. In that period, I internalized -- without questioning it -- the prevailing
          notion that the use of sign language was inferior. Of course, I was unable to understand classes
          taught in spoken language only and I hated myself for not being able to hear. However, I often
          went to my Deaf grandparents' home and talk in sign language with them. In retrospect, I think
          that space in which I could be with other Deaf persons was where I felt safe and secure. I failed
          the high school entrance exam because of my hearing loss, even though my marks had exceeded
          the passing score. Although I was eventually accepted by the school of my first choice, initially, I
          saw no point in going to school. Then, one day, after watching a documentary programme about
          children working in a cacao plantation, I realized the value of school and I became interested in
          international development.

          With the support of the Nippon Foundation Overseas Scholarship Programme for the Deaf, I
          studied at Gallaudet University in the U.S. where I obtained a Bachelor of Social Work and a
          Master's of Arts in International Development and Public Administration. Gallaudet University is
          the only liberal arts college for Deaf persons in the world, with all classes taught in American Sign
          Language and English. There I had an unprecedented experience: I could participate fully in all
          classes; I could discuss with my classmates on an equal basis; I experienced being treated equally
          as a human being. I learned how much joy it was to learn together with others and how sign
          languages opened up a whole new world of possibilities. The presence of many role models who
          used sign languages and were active in diverse professional careers and leadership positions, such
          as that of lawyer, doctor, teacher, CEO and president, also enabled me to expunge the internalized
          negative image of Deaf people, replacing that with pride in my identity as a Deaf person. In 2019,
          I joined the Nippon Foundation. Today, as a member of its True Colours Team/Global Issues Team
          in the Global Issues Department, I am in charge of coordinating projects to support Deaf persons
          and promote sign language development in the Asian and Pacific region. I am working to spread
          the ethos of Gallaudet University, to empower Deaf persons in Asia-Pacific who are two thirds of
          the world's Deaf persons.
WHAT IS IT?                                                                                                            25

Q2. IS SIGN LANGUAGE MADE UP
ONLY OF HAND GESTURES?

No, sign language is not the gesture itself, but it is a language generated by
the development of the gestural system. This parallels the fact that spoken
language is not the voice itself, but the language generated by the development
of the vocal system.

Most hearing people tend to be unaware that they also use gestures when
talking in spoken languages.

In fact, from birth, infants use facial expressions, sounds, gaze and gestures to
let caregivers know how they feel. In the first three months, babies use their
whole bodies to express feelings, from wriggling with happiness to arching
away when upset.29 Communication via simple gestures, facial expressions
(including via eye contact in sighted babies), as well as body movement
(moving the legs in excitement) and body orientation, are babies' ways to
demonstrate signs for feelings and desires -- wanting to be carried, wanting
more of something, rejecting something, distress or joy. When babies shake
their heads or turn away, they are indicating "No more."

Babies seek communication and, if it is not reciprocated, they will stop
seeking it. The complex back-and-forth between caregiver and baby, where a
caregiver responds to a baby's individual body language and mood and gives
the infant the opportunity to communicate back, is known as the `dance of
reciprocity.' It is a vital part of an infant's development, laying the foundations
for communication as a whole, as well as helping a child feel safe and secure.
If children feel safe, they are more ready to explore the world. If they are
anxiousthey are less likely to engage in exploration and learning.30 Non-verbal
interactions are very important in early development, when brain growth
is rapidly occurring and connections are being made. All this has profound
implications for Deaf children and what enables Deaf children to grow and
thrive --- or prevents them from fulfilling their true potential.

In ball games involving communication among team players and between
players and their coach, hand signs for communication are worked out and
used, as in baseball, cricket and kabbadi.31

Arm and hand signals, gestures and touch signs have become a standard
part of communication in the military, especially in combat or operational

29 Early Communication and Language. https://www.first5la.org/article/early-communication-and-language/.
30 Goddard, Charlotte (2018). "Non-verbal Communication: babies ­ More than words." May 28, 2018 in
https://www.nurseryworld.co.uk/features/article/non-verbal-communication-babies-more-than-words.
31 A fast-paced, highly energetic combative contact sport with its origin in ancient South Indian sports history that
became an Asian Games event from 1992: https://www.yogems.com/yopedia/the-pulsating-game-of-kabaddi/; Jami
N. Fisher - Randy Fisher (2008). "The Deaf and the Origin of Hand Signals in Baseball," The National Pastime (Vol-
ume 28, 2008): https://sabr.org/journal/article/the-deaf-and-the-origin-of-hand-signals-in-baseball/>; Cricket Umpire
Signals: What They Mean Illustrated with Images: https://www.itsonlycricket.com/umpire-signals; Kabaddi Official
Signals, November 24, 2020: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bfTd6D7FeQc.
26  SIGN LANGUAGE

    conditions requiring silence and stealth. When sight lines are clear, visual
    signals (military arm and hand signals) can be used over short distances to
    share basic messages. Dozens of different visual signals are used; they are
    complex but do not amount to a complete language. They can quickly convey
    critical information: e.g., directional commands for tactical maneuvers, troop
    readiness or details about the locations of other parties.32

                                                     Figure 2.1
                            Underwater communication using hand signals

    So, is it possible to stop vocalizing and talk just by gesturing?
    Let's imagine it. When you are diving underwater with your friends, you can
    exchange some important information by using gestures that are mutually
    understood, such as pointing towards the right direction to go, gesturing the
    need to be careful about something, or signaling that the air in the cylinder is
    low. You may be able to point to things, to describe the shapes and movements
    of things. But, can you tell your friends about the fish seen underwater by using
    gestures underwater?

                                                         Figure 2.2
                                 Underwater conversation using sign language

                                            (as distinct from hand signals)

    Deaf persons can do so by using sign language, even underwater. Conversely,
    it would be difficult to convey the past, the future and abstract thoughts only
    by gesturing. This is because gestures can work at the word or phrase level,

    32 "Visual signals: Military communication without words," Consortium for Health and Military Performance (CHAMP)
    Human Performance Resources, Uniformed Services University:
    https://www.hprc-online.org/social-fitness/teams-leadership/visual-signals-military-communication-without-words.
WHAT IS IT?                                                                    27

but not to produce new sentences. Sign languages are equipped with rules
and processes for sentence composition and the formation of new words and
meanings.

Spoken languages are vocal systems, whereas signed languages are gestural
systems. While spoken language vocabulary and grammar are produced
through sounds, sign languages consist of vocabulary and grammar based on
configurations and movement of the hands combined with facial expression,
head and body movement.

For example, the direction of pointing or movement of signs has a function
corresponding to the information about people as the subject or object of
spoken language. The sentence types, such as affirmative sentence, negative
sentence, and interrogative sentence, are shown by adjusting the facial
expression and head movement. Therefore, sign language is not the gesture
itself; instead, it is a language equipped with structure and system, just as
spoken language is not the voice itself.

                                         Figure 2.3
Sign language has its own structure and a system, like spoken language
28                                         SIGN LANGUAGE

    Q3. HOW ARE SIGN LANGUAGES
    DIFFERENT FROM SPOKEN
    LANGUAGES?

                                                         Figure 2.4
                                     Hearing people speaking on the phone

    The most obvious difference is the sensory modality of spoken and signed
    communication: spoken languages rely on voice, sound and hearing. Sign
    languages are expressed on the hands and face, and are received through
    the eyes. This means that signers need to see the people they are interacting
    with. Online video applications enable Deaf persons to have virtual face-to-
    face communication regardless of physical distance, just as hearing people
    take speaking on the phone for granted. On a video phone call, a Deaf person
    can maintain eye contact and see the hands, face and body of another signer.

                       Figure 2.5
    Deaf persons talking on a video phone
   WHAT IS IT?                                                                         29

   Sign language grammar differs from that of spoken languages. People may
   assume that signed sentences follow the word order of a spoken sentence.
   Sometimes this is true, but often the syntax is different. For example, the
   English sentence "I flew from Singapore to Tokyo" is expressed in NZSL as
   follows:

I               Singapore  Tokyo                                                  Fly

                                        Figure 2.6
   "I flew from Singapore to Tokyo" in New Zealand Sign Language

   Sign languages use space and movement to convey grammatical meaning. In
   addition, specific facial expressions and head movements are used to indicate
   sentence types such as a question, or a negated statement. For example, the
   English sentence "Do you like apples?" can be expressed in NZSL by raising
   the eyebrows as follows:

                                              Figure 2.7
                "Do you like apples?" (in New Zealand Sign Language)
30  SIGN LANGUAGE

    Q4. IS SIGN LANGUAGE A
    UNIVERSAL CODE LIKE BRAILLE?33

    Sign language is often erroneously likened to a system like Braille. Blind
    people can hear and acquire a spoken language, but cannot access written
    text. Braille is a system devised to represent the written script of a spoken
    language with 63 symbols made by combining six raised dots. Some countries
    have organizations or committees that determine Braille notation rules, and
    the notation rules are revised regularly to correspond to changes in spoken
    language, such as new technical terms. Since Braille codes written letters and
    words, it is considered to be one of the writing systems of spoken language,
    rather than a system that is independent from spoken language.

    Signed languages, in contrast, do not `code' a spoken language with universal
    symbols, but they develop independently and locally within Deaf communities
    and serve as primary languages. The Convention on the Rights of Persons with
    Disabilities distinguishes Braille as a means of communication from signed
    language as a distinct language.

                                                         Figure 2.8
                     A Blind person using Braille; and an example of a Braille system

    33 There is debate regarding capitalization of the word "braille"; in this guide, we use capital letters in accordance
    with the spirit of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. See Charlotte Cushman (2016). "Should
    the word "braille" be capitalized?" in Paths to Literacy, Jun 06, 2016:
    https://www.pathstoliteracy.org/news/should-word-braille-be-capitalized#:~:text=%22BANA%20recommends%20
    that%20the%20word,initial%20letter%20should%20be%20capitalized.%22.
WHAT IS IT?                                                                                                                                 31

                                                                                                 http://www.braillechess.com/Alphabet.html

Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, Article 2, Definitions:

"Communication" includes languages, display of text, Braille, tactile
communication, large print, accessible multimedia as well as written, audio,
plain-language, human-reader and augmentative and alternative modes,
means and formats of communication, including accessible information and
communication technology;

"Language" includes spoken and signed languages and other forms of non-
spoken languages;

Many sign languages do include a fingerspelling or sign system that represents
the letters or characters of a written language. Just as spoken languages often
borrow words from foreign languages, signers can use them to represent
written words on the hands as needed, but it is usually a small part of the
overall language.
32  SIGN LANGUAGE

    Q5. DO DEAFBLIND PERSONS USE
    SIGN LANGUAGE?

    As described in Chapter One, it is not only Deaf persons who use sign language.
    Sign language interpreters, family members of Deaf persons, teachers at
    schools where Deaf children study, and staff members at facilities where Deaf
    persons gather ­ all use sign language to interact with Deaf persons.

    Deafblind persons, like Deaf persons, can use sign language as their main
    language. A Deafblind person is a person who has both visual and hearing
    impairments. A simple classification of the degree of disability includes: a Deaf
    person with low vision, a Deaf person with blindness, a Hard-of-Hearing person
    with low vision, a Hard-of-Hearing person with blindness, with the disabilities
    varying in degree.

    Deafblind people may differ from each other in the onset of their disabilities,
    i.e., whether they were Deafblind at birth or the Deafblindness developed later
    in life. The time of onset at the stage of the individual's life affects the preferred
    choice of language and communication methods. In general, people who
    were visually impaired first and later developed hearing impairment (blind-
    based Deafblind person) have acquired a spoken language in childhood and
    continue to use Braille. Some among such Deafblind individuals use "finger
    Braille" -- tapping their fingers in the pattern of typing Braille.34

                                                         Figure 2.9
                                       Deafblind people using finger Braille

    On the other hand, people who are deaf first and then become visually
    impaired later in life (Deaf-based Deafblind persons) are likely to know sign
    language and to become tactile sign language users. To compensate for

    34 https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/4304074
WHAT IS IT?                                                                                                       33

restricted vision, they place their own hands over the hands of a conversation
partner who is signing to them, and `read' the signs through feeling the
movement of the hands. This is called tactile sign language, and is generally
regarded as a variant of the national sign language. Since they cannot see the
facial expressions, head movements, body orientation, and spatial reference
(e.g., pointing) of a conversation partner, tactile signers may instead convey
`tone' and grammatical information by adding additional signs, refrain from
pointing, and add strength to their hand movements.35 For example, in some
sign languages, a question is indicated by adding facial expressions. Instead
of facial expressions, tactile signers add a question word to the end of the
sentence to seek the conversation partner's response.

In addition, Deaf persons with low vision or tunnel vision may pay attention to
the amount of light and positioning so that the conversation partner's face and
signs can be seen.

                                                     Figure 2.10
                              Deafblind people using tactile sign language

In order for Deafblind people who use tactile sign language to participate in
society, services that assist with mobility and services that interpret spoken
language are provided in several countries. Sighted Deaf persons are often
involved in providing accessibility services to Deafblind individuals.

There are no global statistics on the number of Deafblind people. This is
because the definition of the term "Deafblind" varies from country to country
and some countries have no definition of the term at all, making it difficult to
conduct surveys. An example of a rare country that does keep statistics is Japan.
According to Japanese Government statistics (2012), there are at least 14,000
Deafblind people in Japan. This constitutes about 0.0001% of the Japanese
population. Given the higher incidence, in developing countries, of visual
impairment due to nutritional deficiencies, the incidence of Deafblindness is
likely to be higher too.

35 Mesch, Johanna (2001). Tactile Sign Language: Turn-taking and questions in signed conversations of deaf-blind
people. Signum, Hamburg.
34  SIGN LANGUAGE

    Q6. ARE THERE DICTIONARIES OF
    SIGN LANGUAGES?

    Yes, dictionaries have been published for numerous sign languages. Some
    dictionaries are available online free of charge.

    Indian Sign Language Dictionary ­ Government Initiative

    The Indian Sign Language Research and Training Centre (ISLRTC), Department
    of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities, Ministry of Social Justice and
    Empowerment, Government of India, has issued three editions of the ISL
    Dictionary.36 The first ISLRTC edition, containing 3,000 Hindi and English terms
    and their corresponding graphic representation of signs used in daily life37,
    was launched in March 2018. That was followed by the February 2019 launch of
    the second ISLRTC edition with 6,000 terms. In February 2021, the third ISLRTC
    edition of the Indian Sign Language Dictionary was released. The third edition
    contains 10,000 terms for everyday use; they range from the names of banks,
    political parties, websites and apps to types of relationships and Indian fast
    food dishes, as well as academic, legal, administrative, medical, technical and
    agricultural terms.38

    Available free as a Google document and via YouTube videos,39 the ISLRTC
    Dictionary includes for each sign, the equivalent in English and pictures
    wherever relevant. The Dictionary also includes terms used in different parts
    of India.

    Indian Deaf experts provided the signs for the Dictionary. H.E. Prime Minister
    Narendra Modi launched the third edition of the ISL Dictionary on 7 September
    2021.40

    Indian Sign Language Dictionary ­ a civil society initiative in
    partnership with Government

    The first Indian Sign Language Dictionary, released in November 2001,41 was the
    outcome of collaboration between two renowned civil society organizations:
    Ramakrishna Mission, India, and CBM International, headquartered in Germany.
    Building on years of research, it documented over 2,500 signs from 42 cities in
    12 States. A year later (November 2002), an instructional video was produced. In

    36 http://www.islrtc.nic.in/isl-dictionary-launch
    37 https://www.firstpost.com/india/indias-first-ever-sign-language-dictionary-containing-over-3000-hindi-and-english-
    words-released-4402729.html
    38 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=u7PLuQaM8Bg; https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/indian-sign-lan-
    guage-dictionary-with-10000-terms-released/article33863304.ece
    39 https://www.youtube.com/channel/UC3AcGIlqVI4nJWCwHgHFXtg/videos
    40 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=u7PLuQaM8Bg
    41 https://indiansignlanguage.org/history/
WHAT IS IT?                                                                                                                        35

addition, Ramakrishna Mission has released a technical sign language dictionary
in English to enable Deaf students to pursue a polytechnic education, with
signs for physics subjects taught in school. Ramakrishna Mission is developing
signs for mathematics, chemistry and zoology. Furthermore, in collaboration
with the All-India Deaf Bank Employees Association, Ramakrishna Mission has
produced an Indian Sign Language Dictionary on Banking Terminology that is
thus far available only in English.

The Sign Language Unit, Department of Hearing Impairment, Faculty of
Disability Management and Special Education (FDMSE) of Ramakrishna
Mission Vivekananda University (RKMVU),42 Coimbatore, India, works on the
promotion and development of sign language. The Unit offers many long- and
short-term courses for developing capability in education and rehabilitation.
In addition to its academic functions, the Unit is actively involved in research
and development of various aspects of sign language. The Unit has conducted
a series of workshops whose participants were representatives of the Deaf
community, and Deaf stakeholders across India. The outcome was the issuance
of the above-mentioned General Indian Sign Language Dictionary that has
words used in daily life for communication. The Dictionary is available via an
online portal43 and in print and CD format. To promote the universalization
of the Indian Sign Language for Deaf persons and Hard of Hearing persons,
the Dictionary has been translated into 11 languages44 widely used in India,
including English, with the financial support of CBM India Trust, Bangalore.

FDMSE, in collaboration with the Centre for Development of Advanced
Computing (C-DAC)45 Hyderabad, under the Ministry of Electronics and
Information Technology, Government of India, has created an Android App
for its General Sign Language Dictionary46. For this, videos of the Dictionary
entries have been produced. The app has been released for public download
as part of the Digital India Initiative by C-DAC Hyderabad. The videos will be
further upgraded and the vocabulary entries improved.47

Electronic versions have the great advantage of showing sign language
expressions in video format. In addition to the above-mentioned initiatives
regarding Indian Sign Language dictionaries, the electronic dictionaries of
Australian Sign Language48 and New Zealand Sign Language49 are also available
online. Both were produced by universities in cooperation with the respective

42 Renamed Ramakrishna Mission Vivekananda Educational and Research Institute (RKMVERI), the university places
special emphasis on areas of study and research (termed "thrust areas") that are of immense importance and social
relevance, but are nevertheless under-represented in the Indian educational framework, such as fundamental scienc-
es, rural and tribal development, disability management, and disaster management. Established in 2005, RKMVERI
is an institution deemed-to-be university, as declared by the Ministry of Human Resource Development,
Government of India http://rkmvu.ac.in/overview/.

43 https://indiansignlanguage.org/?__cf_chl_jschl_tk__=pmd_gzCoTY1QCoNVvQdHHrqSb2Zb9YCp16v8iPMDpvE-
1WbA-1635318401-0-gqNtZGzNAhCjcnBszQi9

44 (1) English; (2) Hindi; (3) Tamil; (4) Telugu; (5) Kannada; (6) Bengali; (7) Malayalam; (8) Marathi; (9) Gujarati; (10) Oriya;
(11) Punjabi.

45 The Centre for Development of Advanced Computing (C-DAC) is India's premier organization for carrying out
research and development in information technology, electronics and associated areas of the Ministry of Electronics
and Information Technology (MeitY), Government of India. https://www.cdac.in/index.aspx?id=CorporateProfile

46 https://apps.mgov.gov.in/details;jsessionid=572E597C1952C0B1D2F499CB82032BDC?appid=1441

47 For more information on the app and other details: https://indiansignlanguage.org/; https://vucbe.org/.

48 https://www.auslan.org.au/

49 https://www.nzsl.nz/
36  SIGN LANGUAGE

    Deaf communities and with financial support from Government and private
    organizations. The making of the New Zealand Sign Language Dictionary
    contributed to the legal recognition of sign language in New Zealand.

                                                Photo: Australian Sign Language (Auslan) Signbank
                                                                           Photo source: Auslan Signbank

    Hard copy paper dictionaries have been published for many sign languages,
    and they are still widely used today. In these dictionaries, sign vocabulary is
    listed in various formats, such as illustrations, symbols, still images, and text
    descriptions.50

                        Photo:  Malaysian Sign Language-English-Malay, a handshape dictionary
                Photo source: Malaysian Sign Language and Deaf Studies Association (MyBIM)

    Dictionaries of sign languages are of great significance in that they are
    evidence of the existence of the sign languages. They can be used to support
    the learning of sign languages and build sign language capability, especially in
    the training of sign language interpreters.

    50 The first full-fledged dictionary providing information about components of sign words was A Dictionary of Ameri-
    can Sign Language on Linguistic Principles co-authored by William C. Stokoe, Jr. Carl Croneberg and Dorothy Cast-
    erline. In this dictionary, each sign word is described as a combination of four categories of symbols:TAB (location),
    DEZ (handshape), SIG (movement) and palm orientation. These categories constitute the Stokoe Notation system.
    Sign words are then listed in systematic order so that one can find a sign word in the dictionary.
WHAT IS IT?                                                                                                       37

             The Indian Sign Language App is based on the 10,000-word Indian Sign Language
               Dictionary developed by the Indian Sign Language Research and Training Centre,
              New Delhi. All words can be searched in Hindi or in English. Its sign videos can be
                 shared via social media platforms. The Indian Sign Language App is available in
              Android version and iOS version. Its purpose is to make the Indian Sign Language
                    Dictionary easily available to the general public to access. http://www.isirtc.nic.in
                                 This is the link for the 10,000-word Indian Sign Language Dictionary:
                                 https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1U-Pr4r1-cupgNOOq9NH_uTsQnPSVEKco

As with the compilation of a dictionary for a spoken language, the creation
of a sign language dictionary requires not only human resources such as
native informants, language researchers, and experts in editing and database
techniques, but also funding to support a project for several years.

Chinese Sign Language Dictionaries

Standardization of the Chinese Sign Language, Zhongguo Shouyu, began in
the 1950s. The process officially began with the foundation of the Deaf Sign
Language Reform Committee in 1957 by the China Deaf and Blind People's
Welfare Association, following the National Language Reform Committee's
decision (in 1955) to standardize spoken and written Chinese.51

In 1959, the Committee published the first manual phonetic alphabet of
Modern Chinese, consisting of a total of 30 hand charts, including graphic
representations of the one-handed signs used for the representation of the 26
alphabet letters, plus four one-handed signs used for the representation of the
four consonant combinations: zh, ch, sh, and ng.

This was followed by a compilation, in 1961, of the four-volume Chinese Sign
Language lexicon entitled Longyaren Tongyoung Shouyu Tu (Standard Signs
for Deaf Persons), which was officially published in 1963. In May 1987, the
participants of the Third All-China Sign Language Working Meeting in Taian,

51 The first three paragraphs of this section on Chinese Sign Language Dictionaries are excerpted from: Abhishek
G. Bhaya (2019). "International Day of Sign Languages: China's sign language history dates back to Tang Dynasty
period," CGTN, updated 09:42 hrs, 23 September 2019. Accessed
https://news.cgtn.com/news/2019-09-23/IDSL-China-s-sign-language-history-dates-back-to-Tang-Dynasty-period-
KamfGp0Q1y/index.html.
38  SIGN LANGUAGE

    Shandong Province, China, agreed to use Zhongguo Shouyu as the title of
    the new edition of the lexicon which was published in 1990, establishing the
    official name for the Chinese Sign Language.

    In the Dictionary of Special Education (Piao, 1996), Chinese Sign Language
    is defined as all of the sign gesture language and fingerspelling used in
    China, as well as signing and gesture language used by people living in Hong
    Kong, China; Macao, China; and Taiwan, China. Some early Chinese Sign
    Language dictionaries were the Longyaren Tongyong Shouyu Caotu (draft
    of sign language for deaf, 1959) and Longyaren Tongyong Shouyu Tu (chart
    of sign language for deaf, 1979). An updated, authorized dictionary, Chinese
    Sign Language (Pu, 1989), collected about 3,000 lexical terms, three quarters
    of which come from the Longyaren Tongyong Shouyu Tu (1979). The Chinese
    Sign Language supplement (1992) collected an additional 2,266 words. The
    stated primary reason for making Chinese Sign Language dictionaries is
    to standardize Chinese Sign Language (Piao, 1996; Wen, 1986). There are
    Chinese Sign Language dialects reflecting different local signs. There is
    atleast one view that there are great differences and few similarities52 between
    the Northern Chinese Sign Language dialect and the Southern Chinese Sign
    Language dialect in lexicon and the use of facial expression or mouthing.53
    The Northern (Beijing) and Southern (Shanghai) versions form the two most
    commonly used dialects in the country. The authorized dictionary reflects the
    Southern dialect.54

    In 2018, after seven years of meticulous research, China's State Language
    Commission released the Lexicon of Common Expressions in Chinese
    Standard Sign Language. This constitutes the first national standards for
    Chinese Sign Language and provides systematic and normative guidance on
    its use. Implemented from 1 July 2018, the Lexicon of Common Expressions
    in Chinese Standard Sign Language contains over 5,000 common words in
    daily use:
    http://www.moe.gov.cn/jyb_sjzl/ziliao/A19/201807/t20180725_343691.html

    To promote the use of Chinese Sign Language, the following were published:
    Common Computer-related Expressions in Chinese Standard Sign Language;
    Common Art Expressions in Chinese Standard Sign Language; Common Sports
    and Rhythmic Movement Expressions in Chinese Standard Sign Language.

    The four-volume Dictionary of Chinese Standard Sign Language, published
    in 2019, contains over 8,200 common words in daily use. The Dictionary is
    available in bookstores and e-commerce platforms. The print version of the
    Dictionary was launched with an APP. The APP is compatible with both IOS
    and Android systems and can be downloaded online. Each print copy of the
    Dictionary has a unique serial number; with the serial number, the reader can
    become a registered APP user. The APP includes functions, such as quick

    52 X.Y. Gao in videotape interviews, source: personal communication with Jun Hui Yang on 12 June 1999.

    53 This paragraph is excerpted (with minor amendment to adapt it for insertion in this publication) from Jun Hui Yang
    (2005). "Expressing Negation in Chinese Sign Language," Thesis. RIT Scholar Works, National Technical Institute
    for the Deaf ROCHESTER INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY, Rochester, New York, USA. Accessed from: https://
    scholarworks.rit.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=5014&context=theses

    54 Abhishek G. Bhaya (2019), Ibid.. https://news.cgtn.com/news/2019-09-23/IDSL-China-s-sign-language-history-
    dates-back-to-Tang-Dynasty-period-KamfGp0Q1y/index.html.
WHAT IS IT?                                                                                                           39

retrieval, video demonstration of how each word is signed, a daily challenge
programme, vocabulary of different classifications, and learning plans. There
are multiple ways to retrieve the words, such as by spelling (in Hanyu Pinyin
romanized Chinese) and Chinese character strokes. The publisher and APP
developer (Huaxia Publishing House) has established a Digital Promotion
Centre for Chinese Standard Sign Language with plans to explore more ways
of using digital technology for its promotion.

Photo: Cover of Tibetan Standard Sign                     Photo: Uighur version, common expressions in
                        Language Dictionary              Chinese Standard Sign Language for sports and

Photo source: China Disabled Persons'                                                         rhythmic movement
                                     Federation                      Photo source: China Disabled Persons'

                                                                                                          Federation

Photo:  Uighur version, common expressions                       Photo:  Uighur version, common
            in Chinese Standard Sign Language             expressions in Chinese Standard Sign
                           regarding computer use
                                                                      Language regarding the arts
        Photo source: China Disabled Persons'            Photo source: China Disabled Persons'
                                             Federation
                                                                                              Federation
40

       Box 5. The Asian SignBank, The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
       Hong Kong, China

                                                                                                                                         Photo: Asian SignBank
                                                                                                                               Photo source:  Asian SignBank

          The Asian Sign Bank55 is a searchable online database developed for sign language research, to
          facilitate component analysis and storage of sign entries. It allows users to look up sign words,
          including those of Hong Kong, China; Indonesia (Jakarta and Yogjakarta); Japan; Sri Lanka; Viet
          Nam (Ho Chi Minh City); and Myanmar (Yangon) ­ sign language and on a word-by-word basis.
          Teams of Deaf and hearing researchers in the participating countries collect, film, analyze, document
          and archive signs, along with information that facilitates searching. Users can search by entering
          a word or phrase or by clicking on a hand shape. The database then shows the full meaning of
          the sign, lists in which country and region the sign is used, and provides a video of the sign and a
          description in both English and the native language.
          Initiated by the Centre for Sign Linguistics and Deaf Studies, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
          (CUHK),56 in Hong Kong, China, the Asian SignBank is built on the philosophical foundation of
          Sign Linguistics, with the technical implementation of Systems Engineering via joint efforts of the
          two CUHK partners: the Department of Linguistics and Modern Languages, and the Department
          of Systems Engineering and Engineering Management. The Asian SignBank receives financial
          support from The Nippon Foundation.

                                                                                                                            https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=C67WvSqxync
                                                                                                                                Photo source: Asian SignBank

                55 http://cslds.org/asiansignbank/; see also http://www.cslds.org/apsl/
                56 http://www.cslds.org/v4/about.php
WHAT IS IT?                                                                        41

Q7.WHAT RESEARCH EXISTS ON
SIGN LANGUAGES IN ASIA-PACIFIC?

William C. Stokoe Jr. (1919-2000),57 was an American linguist and Professor
Emeritus at Gallaudet University when he passed away. His research on ASL
revolutionized understanding of ASL in the US. Before his groundbreaking
work, sign language was viewed in the US as a collection of meaningless
gestures or pantomime. In 1957, two years after joining Gallaudet College
(before it became a University), Stokoe and two assistants (Carl Croneberg
and Dorothy Casterline) began to film people using sign language. Studying
the filmed sign language, Stokoe and his team identified the elements of a
real language being used. The results of their research were published in a
1960 research monograph, Sign Language Structure. Although Sign Language
Structure was published first, it is the team's 1965 publication A Dictionary of
American Sign Language on Linguistic Principles that sparked interest in ASL
linguistics.58 Since his pioneering work, documentation of signed languages
around the world has increased. This research has expanded understanding
of human language in the field of linguistics, by exploring what is common or
unique to the structures of spoken and manual modes of language.

In Asia and the Pacific, as well as in other regions of the world, it may be said
that research on sign languages and their use in the lives of Deaf persons has
contributed to reducing common misunderstanding and prejudice towards
sign languages, and has facilitated social and legal recognition of sign
languages.

Research on sign languages began mainly in universities and research institutes
in the United States and Europe. In recent decades, Asia-Pacific research on
and documentation of sign languages have grown with the participation
of representative organizations of Deaf persons, universities and research
institutes.

As for universities and research institutes, special mention should be made
of the `Asia Pacific Sign Linguistics Research and Training Programme' (APSL
Programme)59 of the Chinese University of Hong Kong, with funding from The
Nippon Foundation. The Programme is training Deaf persons from various
parts of the Asian and Pacific region as sign language researchers, creators of
sign language learning materials, and teachers.60

As an example of a Deaf organization, the National Association of the Deaf
in Thailand is developing a sign language database, with the aim of raising
the status of Thai Sign Language and promoting its use by Deaf Thais.61

57 http://gupress.gallaudet.edu/stokoe.html
58 https://www.verywellhealth.com/profile-of-william-c-stokoe-jr-1049429
59 http://www.cslds.org/apsl/about.php
60 http://www.cslds.org/apsl/index.php
61 https://www.th-sl.com/?openExternalBrowser=1
42

       Box 6. For Deaf older persons, a home that is a
       sanctuary: Deaf community initiative, Japan

          High quality residential care facilities for older persons are much in demand, with
          the rapid aging of the population of the Asia-Pacific region. In Sumoto City, Hyogo
          Prefecture, Japan, there is a residential facility for Deaf older persons. The facility,
          Awaji Fukurou no Sato,62 is managed by the Hyogo Welfare Association for the Deaf.

          The facility has customized design features, including a Deaf person-friendly open-
          plan layout: there are no visual barriers such as walls and pillars and no bends in
          corridors, as Deaf persons cannot hear each other's approaching footsteps. Instead,
          mirrors have been installed. All those are accessibility and safety features to minimize
          the risk of Deaf residents colliding into each other, as Deaf persons cannot hear
          approaching footsteps. The building design allows residents to see each other and
          talk with each other in Japanese Sign Language from the dining room to the living
          room. Accessibility and safety features at the facility also include a flashing light alarm
          system for emergency situations.

          There are private bedrooms for all residents who live together in small group units.
          Each room is equipped with the following: a TV monitor that displays information
          disseminated from the Administration Office, a flashing light system that indicates
          someone is at the door to the room and a decoder for closed captioning to support
          the viewing of TV programmes.63

          The Awaji Fukurou no Sato's careful design caters to Deaf persons' primary need
          for visual information at all times. The building design was the creation of a firm,
          Rui Sekkei, led by three Deaf persons: Mr Nobuyuki Mitani, Deaf architect; Mr
          Hiroshi Komatsu, Deaf Team Leader; and Mr Susumu Oya, Deaf Co-Leader. They
          participated in weekly building design meetings to discuss needs, especially from
          the perspective of Deaf users. Awaji Fukurou no Sato has a total floor space of about
          4000 m2, built on a ground space of 10,000 m2. It can accommodate up to 60 Deaf
          older persons, with a total of 54 staff members who are able to communicate in
          Japanese Sign Language. It was opened in 2006, after concerted efforts by three
          civil society organizations in Hyogo Prefecture: the Hyogo Association for the Deaf;
          Hyogo Sign Language Interpreter Association and the Hyogo Sign Language Circle
          Liaison Association. Together, they and hearing supporters raised over 500 million
          yen (equivalent to approximately US$5 million) for the establishment of the facility.
          Dr Liisa Kauppinen, the then President of the World Federation of the Deaf, was a
          strong supporter of the initiative.

          Prior to moving to the facility, some Awaji Fukurou no Sato residents had spent 50
          years in psychiatric hospitals. This was because they had been misdiagnosed as
          having psychiatric symptoms by doctors who did not understand deafness. There
          had been a general lack of understanding of the critical importance of Japanese Sign
          Language and the experience of being Deaf. Other residents had undergone forced
          sterilization without prior informed consent.
          Awaji Fukurou no Sato provides a place of comfort and safety for Deaf older persons,

                62 In Japanese culture, "owl" is often used to refer to the Deaf community. Thus, Awaji Fukurou no Sato in English could be read
                as Happy Deaf Village: Special Care Home for Deaf Older Persons.

                63 "New Nursing Care Facilities to Ensure a Happy Future for Aged Deaf."
                Posted on 1 April 2006 in Japanese Deaf News https://www.jfd.or.jp/en/2006/04/01/pid426
                                                                                                                                                                        43

                                                                                                                                Photo source: Awaji Fukurou no Sato

addressing anxieties that are common among them. Residents need not be fearful of
how other people treat them or of being socially isolated. They have the assurance that
they will be well taken care of, in case they fall ill. Here, Deaf older residents are able to
chat with each other in a relaxed manner in Japanese Sign Language.
44  SIGN LANGUAGE
WHAT IS IT?                                             45

                       CHAPTER

    03
              DEAF
        CULTURE

Q1. What is Deaf culture?

Q2. Are Deaf persons disabled persons or members of a 
       linguistic minority?
46  SIGN LANGUAGE

    Q1. WHAT IS DEAF CULTURE?

    In general, culture refers to the behavioral patterns common to a group of
    people and the values that they believe in. In this section, "a group" is replaced
    by "a group of Deaf people," to give context to the phrase `Deaf culture.'

    Deaf persons are visually-oriented to their environment and in contact with
    other Deaf persons, forming Deaf communities. Through regular interaction
    of Deaf communities, common patterns of behavior, values and visually-based
    communication traits are formed.64 Together, these constitute the basis of what
    Deaf persons often refer to as Deaf Culture.

    The assertion of the concept of `Deaf culture' arose in resistance to a history
    of Deaf persons being viewed by most societies as individuals with a hearing
    disability which can be overcome through the use of hearing technology
    and speech training. The strengthening of community pride and claiming of
    a collective cultural identity amongst Deaf persons is closely linked with the
    validation of sign languages through research, teaching, sign language arts,
    and critical language awareness.65

    The following are specific features of Deaf culture:

    Language: Deaf persons acquire sign language in Deaf families and at schools
    or gatherings of Deaf persons, have conversations in sign language, and pass
    it on to others and the next generation. In addition, poems and narratives in
    sign language may be recorded on film or video and valued as literary works
    to be shared mainly but not only within the Deaf community. For example,
    Malaysian Deaf poet, Anthony Chong,66 participates in mainstream literary
    events and has mobilized resources for the training and empowerment of Deaf
    women through feminist poetry using Malaysian Sign Language or Bahasa
    Isyarat Malaysia (BIM).

    Values and beliefs: Deaf persons also have distinct values and beliefs, a key
    one being that being `Deaf' is a high-value identity rather than a deficit that
    requires a remedy. This is linked to attitudes towards cochlear implant surgery,
    perceptions of one's hearing loss, and a common feeling that hearing persons
    hold greater power and have higher status in society than Deaf people. Belief
    in the importance of sign language, especially one's own sign language,
    and shared experience of discrimination create a strong sense of collective
    solidarity within Deaf communities.

    64 Bahan, Ben (2005). "Deaf Culture" Encyclopedia of Disability, Sage Publication.
    65A seminal account of `Deaf culture' is: Padden, Carol and Tom. Humphries (1988). Deaf in America: Voices from a
    Culture. Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press.
    66`Walls' is a poem film created in Malaysian Sign Language (BIM) by BIM poet, Anthony Vee Yee Chong and trans-
    lated into English and film by multimedia poet, Sheena Baharudin:
    https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CQniEC19VNU.
WHAT IS IT?                                                                                              47

Behavioral patterns: One of the well-known behaviors of Deaf persons is
to raise and flutter the hands as `visual' applause. To gain another person's
attention to communicate, a Deaf person might tap the shoulder of that person,
wave a hand, or blink a light in the room to attract the person's eye-gaze, before
signing. Speaking loudly in someone's ear, throwing objects or touching the
head or hands are generally considered impolite ways to establish eye contact.
Face-to-face communication with eye contact is a hallmark of Deaf culture and
communication.

    Figure 3.1                    Figure 3.2
General Applause         Applause of Deaf signers

         Figure 3.3                          Figure 3.4
Conversing side by side  Conversing face to face in sign language

Tradition: In many Deaf communities, Deaf schools play a central role in
historical intergenerational links and in narratives about Deaf identity. Local
Deaf clubs and national organizations have a long history of convening
community events in many countries. International organizations, such as the
World Federation of the Deaf and the International Committee of Sports for
the Deaf (ICSD),67 host traditional events at international and regional levels.

Lifestyle: The lifestyle of Deaf individuals has changed greatly over time,
especially with the development of technology. For example, in the days before
technology became part of daily life, Deaf persons used various methods to
wake up in the morning, such as leaving the curtains open for daylight to stream
in, or drinking extra water before going to bed to be woken by a full bladder.
Nowadays, vibrating alarm clocks are widely used. Deaf persons also tend to
prefer a visually calm environment with good sightlines, such as an open-plan

67ICSD hosts Deaflympics at which Deaf athletes compete at an elite level: http://www.deaflympics.com/.
48  SIGN LANGUAGE

    layout between the living room and the kitchen in a home. The employment
    options of Deaf persons have widened. In the past, the traditional focus was
    on manual occupations. Today, there is more access to higher education, with
    training and interpreting within workplaces becoming better supported in
    many countries.

                                                          Figure 3.5
                                              An open-plan layout makes
                                        sign language communication easier

    The aspects of Deaf culture shown in the above examples are generally
    common to Deaf communities around the world, with local diversity according
    to other parameters such as country/region, ethnicity, gender and religion.

    Like any culture, Deaf culture is acquired within a Deaf community and passed
    on through sign language. For this reason, Deaf organizations advocate the
    importance of congregated schools as specifically designed safe spaces where
    Deaf children can freely use sign language to learn, to thrive, as well as to
    develop Deaf identity and a sense of Deaf community by socializing with Deaf
    peers and absorbing Deaf culture from older role models in the community.68

    Deaf persons' entitlement, on an equal basis with others, to recognition and
    support of Deaf culture, is specifically cited in Article 30 on Participation in
    Cultural Life, Recreation, Leisure and Sports, CRPD:

            "Persons with disabilities shall be entitled, on an equal basis with others,
            to recognition and support of their specific cultural and linguistic identity,
            including sign languages and deaf culture."69

    68 Moores and Martin 2006.
    69 Kauppinen, Liisa and Markku Jokinen (2013). "Including Deaf Culture and Linguistic Rights". Human rights and
    disability advocacy.
WHAT IS IT?                                                                                    49

Q2.ARE DEAF PERSONS DISABLED
PERSONS OR MEMBERS OF A
LINGUISTIC MINORITY?

This question poses the two aspects as opposing concepts when, in fact,
Deaf persons are both persons with disabilities and members of linguistic
minorities. Deaf persons are often at risk in social life because they cannot
hear sounds in the environment. For example, Deaf persons who wear hearing
aids generally take them off when they go to bed. If a fire breaks out while they
are asleep, they cannot hear the sound of an alarm and would be in danger.
At home, they might be alerted by hearing family members, co-residents or
neighbors. However, in accommodation facilities such as hotels or inns that
do not have emergency systems suited to Deaf occupants, they would not be
able to receive emergency warnings in their rooms. Therefore, at the time of
checking into a hotel, Deaf guests must inform reception of their deafness so
that staff arrangements can be made to ensure their safety in an emergency.
The preferred option is to provide Deaf hotel guests with alarm devices that
work by vibration or flashing light.

                                                     Figure 3.6
                   An alarm device that works by vibration and/or flashing light

The above example focuses on deafness as a sensory disability. The
International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF) of the
World Health Organization integrates the medical and social perspectives on
disability as follows:70

"Two major conceptual models of disability have been proposed. The medical
model views disability as a feature of the person, directly caused by disease,
trauma or other health condition, which requires medical care provided in the
form of individual treatment by professionals. Disability, on this model, calls
for medical or other treatment or intervention, to `correct' the problem with
the individual. The social model of disability, on the other hand, sees disability
as a socially-created problem and not at all an attribute of an individual. On

70 WHO (2002). Towards a Common Language for Functioning, Disability and Health, ICF, Geneva:
https://www.who.int/classifications/icf/icfbeginnersguide.pdf
50                                                             SIGN LANGUAGE

    the social model, disability demands a political response, since the problem
    is created by an unaccommodating physical environment brought about by
    attitudes and other features of the social environment. On their own, neither
    model is adequate, although both are partially valid...

    A better model of disability, in short, is one that synthesizes what is true in
    the medical and social models, without making the mistake each makes in
    reducing the whole, complex notion of disability to one of its aspects...."

    Photo: The cover of the WHO ICF Publication       Deaf persons are also members of a
                           Photo source: WHO website  linguistic minority and are vulnerable
                                                      to linguistic oppression in societies
                                                      in which spoken language is the
                                                      norm. Linguistic oppression includes
                                                      facing practical barriers to using
                                                      the language of personal choice for
                                                      everyday purposes, and experiencing
                                                      negative attitudes towards that
                                                      language. In order for Deaf persons
                                                      to be free to use sign language,
                                                      government and society need to
                                                      recognize it as a valid language.

    Article 2 on definitions in the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
    Disabilities states that there are "spoken and signed languages and other
    forms of non spoken languages." Furthermore, as explained in Chapter One,
    the term "sign language" appears in six more places in four articles of the
    Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities:

    Article 9: Accessibility;
    Article 21: Freedom of expression and opinion, and access to information;
    Article 24: Education;
    Article 30: Participation in cultural life, recreation, leisure and sport

    The above underscores the central importance of access to sign languages,
    as distinct from spoken languages, to realization of the human rights of Deaf
    persons.71

    The Universal Declaration of Human Rights of 1948 states:

    "Everyone is entitled to all the rights and freedoms set forth in this
    Declaration, without distinction of any kind, such as race, colour, sex,
    language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin,
    property, birth or other status."

    It is thus incumbent on all States parties to ensure and promote Deaf persons'
    access to sign languages.

    71 Haualand, Hilde, and Colin Allen. (January 2009). Deaf People and Human Rights. World Federation of the Deaf
    and Swedish National Association of the Deaf:
    https://www.rasit.org/files/Deaf-People-and-Human-Rights-Report.pdf
                                                                                                                                                                        51

Box 7. The beauty of sign language through art: multilingual Deaf
woman artist, Jiayi Zhou (she/her), China

                                                                                                                                    Photo source: Jiayi Zhou (she/her)

Jiayi Zhou is a Deaf visual artist and graphic designer in charge of graphic design at the Marketing
Department, Shanghai East International Medical Center,72 Shanghai, China. Jiayi is also a member
of the Shanghai Deaf September Art Organization, and a member of the Deaf Association,
Hongkou District, Shanghai.

After graduating with honours from the Shanghai Institute of Technology, China, in environment art
design, Jiayi spent nearly eight years studying at Gallaudet University, U.S.A. where she trained in
graphic design and studio art and was Outstanding International Development Graduate Student
(M.A. in International Development). Throughout her studies at Gallaudet University, Jiayi received
nine awards and won scholarships on five occasions. Jiayi was the Gallaudet Representative on four
occasions: 2011 -- "First Lady Michelle Obama's `100,000 Strong' China Study Abroad Initiative
Event at Howard University, USA; 2010 and 2009 ­ International Day of Persons with Disabilities
Conference, Washington D.C.; 2009 ­ "First evening of poetry, music and spoken word with
President Obama and his family in the White House." At Gallaudet University, Jiayi worked as
International Relations Specialist and Outreach Social Media Specialist. Jiayi is skilled in American
Sign Language, Chinese Sign Language, International Sign, as well as written Chinese and English.

Jiayi's extensive repertoire includes numerous engagements, for example, as Competitions
Coordinator, Shanghai International Deaf Film Festival; Project Moderator/International Sign
Interpreter in the "Deaf Communication without a Shared Language," research project, Radboud
University, Netherlands; Guest Speaker at the Online China Now Conference-Cultural Exchange
in the New Normal (British Council webinar); Sign Language Interpreter, CSL/ASL interpretation
for Peter Cook's Sign Language Poems Workshop; and Chinese Sign Language Advisor on "Tiger
Style!" show, New York Deaf Theatre. Jiayi has held nine solo exhibitions and participated in eight
major group exhibitions, with preparations for a ninth in progress.

In addition to her hospital-related work, Jiayi works every weekend as a visual artist. Jiayi has
created a portfolio of artworks focusing on expressing Deaf experiences, especially the experiences
of Deaf women. The artistic medium of Jiayi's artworks range from oil, to acrylic, pastel, wood print,
and linoleum print. They are used to express Jiayi's aspiration to eradicate discrimination against
Deaf persons, as well as to celebrate the joy of using Chinese Sign Language, and the beauty of the
many sign languages that exist, as shown in her illustrations.

72 SEIMC is a joint-venture general hospital in Shanghai that provides 24-hour medical care to the international and local communities in Shanghai and
its neighboring provinces. https://www.seimc.com.cn/about/company.htm.
52

    Since October 2021, Jiayi has been leading several art and cultural activities for the Deaf
    community in Shanghai and other cities in China. Jiayi initiated the "ARTSEED+" project which
    enables Chinese Deaf and Hard-of-Hearing people to Sense, Exchange, Earn, Delight (SEED) in
    art that promotes their cultural development and inclusion, and increase diversified employment
    opportunities, like a seed of hope that spotlights the capabilities of Deaf persons. The symbol
    "+" means sustainability and diversity that have the potential to contribute, via the project, to
    greater common good.

    The SEED+ project will also develop and expand the capacity of art institutes to provide more
    accessible services for Deaf and Hard-of-Hearing people who otherwise have limited avenues
    for participation in cultural activities. The SEED+ project includes three workshops (Motion Light
    Lab (ML2))73 CoLab Orientation Workshop, Visual Theatre Training Workshop, Art Sign Language
    Museum Education Workshop), and the Virtual USA/China Art Exhibition by Deaf Artists. All
    these were completed in March 2022.

    ML2, based at Gallaudet University, engages in wide-ranging research-driven projects, including
    the development and distribution of bilingual storybook apps that create immersive learning
    experiences, training to support literacy development of Deaf children, and the creation of
    advanced 3D-signing avatars. Creative literature intersecting with digital technology that
    integrates visual language and visual learning science expands the 3D technology landscape
    for Deaf children. Jiayi's team has commenced collaboration with the ML2 team and conducted
    orientation training (November 2021) for Deaf participants in China on: bilingualism and visual
    learning; children's literature and sign language storytelling; translating text and sign language;
    and digital skills. Jiayi is in the process of identifying Deaf artists, storytellers, and film editors to
    form a Chinese CoLab team.

                                                         Once the team is formed and team
                                                         members have undergone in-depth
                                                         training, Jiayi aims to develop a
                                                         bilingual storybook app. In this
                                                         endeavour, Jiayi and the Chinese
                                                         team would be joining the multi-
                                                         country partnership of nine CoLab
                                                         Deaf country teams. In the ESCAP
                                                         region, thus far, the Deaf teams are
                                                         in Japan, New Zealand, Russian
                                                         Federation, and Thailand.74

    It starts with me, We Can Stop the Virus from        The COVID-19 pandemic shook
         Spreading. Linoleum Block by Jiayi Zhou         Jiayi to the core. While many
                               Photo source: Jiayi Zhou  people, including Deaf persons,
                                                         were frightened by the COVID-19
                                                         infection, Jiayi channeled her fear
                                                         to create art that depicts good
                                                         practices by the government, and
                                                         the responses of civil society and
                                                         Deaf persons in particular.

    73 Motion Light Lab (ML2) is a space where creative literature meets digital technology to create immersive learning experiences:
    https://www.motionlightlab.com/ml2-lab ML2 is part of the National Science Foundation/Gallaudet
    University Science of Learning Center on Visual Language and Visual Learning.

    74 The other five CoLab Deaf teams are in Argentina, Italy, Netherlands, Norway and Saudi Arabia.
                                                                                                                                                              53

"During the coronavirus pandemic, many countries and cities made available in different
languages, including local sign languages, information on how to prevent and address
COVID-19 issues. We Deaf people can and must remain aware of the latest COVID-19
information and safeguard ourselves and others from possible infection and/or further
transmission of the virus. In the top right corner of this artwork is the International Sign for
"COVID-19" that is based on the shape of the virus; many Chinese Deaf persons use this sign
for communicating "COVID-19."

                                                                              ~Jiayi Zhou, Shanghai, China, 2020

                             Art by Jiayi Zhou

                                         My Deaf and Hearing Angels
                                                            Pastel Painting

                                               Photo source: Jiayi Zhou

Deaf Daughter of Hearing Parents
                         Linoleum Block

            Photo source: Jiayi Zhou

            Music of Hands                                              Silent Dialogue
            Acrylic Painting             Acrylic Painting on Chinese Rice Paper
Photo source: Jiayi Zhou
                                                           Photo source: Jiayi Zhou
54  SIGN LANGUAGE
WHAT IS IT?                                                              55

                       CHAPTER

    04

     LANGUAGE
  ACQUISITION

          IN DEAF
   CHILDHOOD

Q1. Why is it important for deaf persons to acquire sign language at 
       the earliest stage of life?

Q2. What is the reality of sign language acquisition for deaf children 
       in Asia-Pacific?

Q3. Should deaf children be taught spoken language?

Q4 What is a main language and what is a secondary language for 
       deaf persons?
56  SIGN LANGUAGE

    Q1.WHY IS IT IMPORTANT FOR
    DEAF PERSONS TO ACQUIRE SIGN
    LANGUAGE AT THE EARLIEST STAGE
    OF LIFE?

    Most infants naturally acquire the language of their family as a mother tongue.
    Infants with less retained hearing face barriers to natural language acquisition,
    depending on the family's use of language. A child born to Deaf parents who
    use sign language in their home and community is in an ideal situation to
    acquire that sign language as a native language.75 Research shows that a deaf
    infant acquiring sign language in a Deaf family follows a similar sequence
    of development to a hearing child acquiring a native spoken language.76
    Native language signing Deaf children go on to learn, through education
    and environmental exposure, the language of the wider society as a second
    language.

    For at least 90 per cent of Deaf children, the more common situation is to
    have hearing parents who communicate in spoken language and have no sign
    language skills.77 In this situation, the Deaf child may not have sufficient access
    either to vocal communication or exposure to sign language. This situation
    offers poor conditions for acquiring a complete first language (spoken or
    signed) which, in turn, could cause delays in developmental milestones and
    learning that require a foundation of language skills.78

    Deaf children who do not acquire sign language at home often learn it through
    interacting with Deaf peers and teachers in an education setting. However, this
    opportunity may come only after the critical period for language acquisition
    during the earliest pre-school years. To ensure `on time' language and cognitive
    development, families need to receive professional and community support to
    use sign language with their Deaf children from the time that deafness is first
    identified.

    75 Native language is a first language, native tongue, native language, or mother/father/parent tongue, is a language
    that a person has been exposed to from birth or within the critical period for language acquisition in a linguistically
    rich environment: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/First_language.

    76 Chen Pichler, D. 2012. "Acquisition," in Sign Language: An International Handbook, edited by R. Pfau, M. Stein-
    bach, B. Woll. pp. 647-686. De Gruyter, Inc.

    77 Mitchell, R. E. & Karchmer, M. A. (2004). "Chasing the mythical ten percent: Parental hearing status of Deaf and
    hard of hearing students in the United States" in Journal of Sign Language Studies, 4(2), 138-163. doi: 10.1353/
    sls.2004.0005.

    78 7 September 2016: WFD Position Paper on Language Rights of Deaf Children summarizes research on the effects
    of language delay and deficit, and the importance of early sign language use:
    http://wfdeaf.org/news/resources/wfd-position-paper-on-the-language-rights-of-deaf-children-7-september-2016/
WHAT IS IT?                                                                                                             57

Acquiring sign language in the earliest years brings the following benefits:

        1. The Deaf child has a fully accessible mode of communication through
             which s/he can develop social relationships with family and friends
             that are essential for healthy psychological development.

        2. Language competence enables brain development that is essential
             for learning; the brain development includes the development of
             memory and other cognitive skills.

        3. By socializing with other sign language users, the Deaf child
             develops, through role-modelling and social inclusion, a positive
             sense of identity and confidence.

        4. Visual (sign) language offers Deaf persons of all ages communication
             without the stress and uncertainty associated with lip-reading79 or
             exclusion from conversation.

        5. Deaf children and adults can use the services of sign language
             interpreters to access education and other mainstream life activities.

These benefits cannot be obtained through oral or written communication
alone, since these forms of communication require knowledge of a spoken
(heard) language which is inaccessible to children who are deaf from an
early age.

79 Lip-reading is a skill of understanding speech by watching the speaker's face, often taught alongside speech train-
ing for Deaf children. Lip-reading is most effective with prior knowledge of the vocabulary and grammar of a spoken
language, and familiarity with the speaker and the topic.
58  SIGN LANGUAGE

    Q2.WHAT IS THE REALITY OF SIGN
    LANGUAGE ACQUISITION FOR
    DEAF CHILDREN IN ASIA-PACIFIC?

    Deaf children everywhere face challenges to language acquisition. For the 90
    per cent of Deaf children who are in non-deaf families, opportunities for sign
    language acquisition are dependent on planned interventions via family and
    school (rather than occurring naturally at home). Thus, institutional policies,
    practices and resources have a major impact on Deaf children's opportunities
    to acquire sign language.

    In developing and least developed countries of the Asian and Pacific region, a
    high proportion of Deaf children and children with disabilities in general lack
    access to formal education. There are wide disparities in access according to
    geographical location, gender, socio-economic status, and cultural beliefs
    about Deaf people.80 These factors also apply regarding early intervention that
    supports acquisition of sign language.

    There are national and individual variations in the approaches that families
    and educators adopt towards Deaf children's language development. Overall,
    educational and medical interventions tend to promote an ideology of hearing
    and speaking as a first priority, with sign language as a remedial or excluded
    mode of communication. This `oralist' ideology is present in much of the
    region. In many cases, this approach has roots in deaf education practices that
    were planted in the colonies, modelling the deaf education pedagogy that
    prevailed in western societies from the late nineteenth century.

    There are promising signs that the tide might be turning with India initiating
    the inclusion of ISL in its curriculum based on the universal design of
    learning ­ as announced by H.E. Prime Minister Narendra Modi, also on 7
    September 2021.81

    The Government of Malaysia, through the Minister of National Unity, H.E. Datuk
    Halimah Mohamed Sadique, announced on 16 October 2021 that the teaching
    and learning of BIM would be introduced from 2022 in all 1,781 Government-
    operated Unity kindergartens involving 38,000 pre-schoolers nationwide
    under the Ministry of National Unity.82 This would be introduced as a third
    language, in addition to Mandarin, Tamil, Kadazan and Iban for the teaching
    of communication language under the Perpaduan (Unity) Kindergarten Early
    Childhood Education Plan 2021-2030. This initiative arose in response to
    a proposal made by the Senator representing the disability community of

    80 World Federation of the Deaf and European Union of the Deaf (2015). "Submission to United Nations Day of Gen-
    eral Discussion on the Right to Education of Persons with Disabilities." Helsinki: World Federation of the Deaf: http://
    wfdeaf.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/12/WFD-and-EUD-submission-to-day-of-general-discussion-on-education.pdf

    81 https://www.aninews.in/videos/national/indian-sign-language-included-subject-first-time-curriculum-pm-modi/

    82 https://www.thestar.com.my/news/nation/2021/10/16/sign-language-to-be-introduced-at-perpaduan-kindergar-
    tens-next-year
    https://www.freemalaysiatoday.com/category/nation/2021/10/16/sign-language-to-be-introduced-in-govt-kindergar-
    tens-says-minister/
WHAT IS IT?                                                                                                           59

Malaysia during a recent debate in Parliament.

In recent decades, however, various countries in the region have initiated
programmes to promote early sign language acquisition for deaf children.
Often, these are localized, experimental programmes that are not available
to all Deaf children nationally, nor are they fully supported by the state. A
distinctive feature of such sign language acquisition initiatives is the role of
Deaf persons as programme leaders and educators. These are different from
conventional programmes that generally exclude or marginalize Deaf persons
as experts and role models.83

Underlining the importance of early sign language acquisition, Article 24.3.b,
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (Convention), directs
States parties to promote full and equal participation in education, by:
"facilitating the learning of sign language and the promotion of the linguistic
identity of the deaf community." At the regional level, the Incheon Strategy to
"Make the Right Real" for Persons with Disabilities in Asia and the Pacific84 includes
as an indicator of progress:

        "5.5 Proportion of children who are deaf that receive instruction in sign
        language."

The following description85 of a family-centered early intervention
programme in Viet Nam illustrates how the Convention and Incheon
principles can be put into practice, through collaboration between
professionals and Deaf community members, and with institutional support:

        "In 2014, Deaf children at the Centre for Supporting and Developing
        Inclusive Education for People with Disabilities (CSDIEPD), Ho Chi Minh
        City, were not just learning sign language. They were being taught how
        to understand the world around them and how to express themselves so
        they could be understood.

        CSDIEPD, along with five other centres in Ho Chi Minh City, Thai Nguyen,
        Quang Binh and Hanoi, is testing an innovative method to improve the
        early development of Deaf children. A "family support team" composed
        of a Deaf mentor, a sign language interpreter and a hearing teacher,
        work with young children and their families in their homes. "This model
        offers a new way to help the children," said Nguyen Thanh Tam, Director
        of the Ho Chi Minh City CSPIEPD. "We used to provide support at the
        centre, but our facilities are limited. Now, we help 150 children in the
        centre and another 170 children in their homes."

83 Lytle R, Johnson KE, Hui YJ. 2006. Deaf Education in China: History, Current Issues, and Emerging Deaf Voices.
American Annals of the Deaf. 150 (5):457­69.

84 United Nations ESCAP (2012). "Incheon Strategy to `Make the Right Real' for Persons with Disabilities in Asia and
the Pacific": http://www.unescap.org/publications/detail.asp?id=1523

85 World Bank (2014). "Unlocking the Potential of Pre-school Deaf Children in Vietnam":
https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/feature/2014/04/17/unlocking-the-potential-of-pre-school-deaf-children-in-
vietnam.print
60  SIGN LANGUAGE

    Supported by the Intergenerational Deaf Education Outreach (IDEO)
    Project, which is financed by the Japan Social Development Fund,
    administered by the World Bank and implemented by World Concern
    Viet Nam as the grant recipient,86 the model has three key features:

     · Use sign language as the primary mode of communication,

          enabling Deaf children to connect with their families and with the
          outside world;

     · Have Deaf mentors as role models, advocates and sign language

          teachers --- because they understand "from the inside" the realities
          of growing up deaf;

     · Involve the family in the Deaf child's learning and development.

    86 JAPAN SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT FUND - GRANT PROPOSAL FY10 ROUND 29 in
    https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/527701518434679056/pdf/123370-FP-Vietnam-Intergeneration-
    al-Deaf-Education-Outreach-Project.pdf
                                                                                                                                                                        61

Box 8. Sign language: a tool for inclusive education

Learning a language is very important in children's development and in preparing
them for primary school. The 2006 Viet Nam Household Living Standards Survey, which
included a special section on disability, found that 18 out of every 10,000 children found
it "very difficult" or "impossible" to hear. By this estimate, some 15,500 Vietnamese
children between the ages of 0 and 5 are in this category. Most of these children lack
access to early education, while their parents lack professional support.

The Government of Viet Nam has accepted sign language as a tool for inclusive
education, but the nation's expert resource -- its signing Deaf adults who possess the
unique empathy and ability to use sign language for a full range of purposes -- has
not been systematically mobilized, trained and employed in childhood education. The
project is helping change this by training Deaf mentors, sign language interpreters and
hearing teachers to ensure that Deaf pre-schoolers get quality education.

Hoang Kim Phuc, a sign language teacher at the Hy Vong School for Children with
Disabilities:

        "I am a person with hearing impairment. When I was young, I could only learn by
        spoken language so I advanced very slowly. Now, with the combination of both sign
        language and spoken language, Deaf children can learn quickly and understand
        what's happening around them."

Not all Deaf Vietnamese children go to school. A pre-school education will improve
their prospects of getting into school. A recent evaluation noted that, even after just
three months of participating in the IDEO project, feedback has been very positive. The
parents in particular report strong learning and improved behavior in their children.
62  SIGN LANGUAGE

    Q3. SHOULD DEAF CHILDREN BE
    TAUGHT SPOKEN LANGUAGE?

    When a child's hearing impairment is discovered, parents usually receive initial
    advice from medical professionals about fostering language development.
    Very often, this advice aligns with hearing parents' natural desire for their child
    to be able to hear better and to acquire the spoken language of the family as
    their first language. Therefore, with the aim of augmenting the child's capacity
    to hear and learn to speak, assistive technology may be offered as the first
    intervention.

    Cochlear implantation surgery may be conducted, often within the first year of
    an infant's life (depending on the country's healthcare policies and resources). A
    cochlear implant converts sound into an electrical signal and transmits it to the
    auditory nerve, making this information available to the brain to process into
    meaning. Digital hearing aids are another technology which transmit sound to
    the eardrum by amplifying sound and filtering background noise.

    Regardless of which type of device children use, intensive training is required
    to identify the meaning of sounds and the structure of language. These
    technologies and therapies now enable many Deaf children to acquire and
    use spoken language more effectively than was possible in the past. However,
    sophisticated technology is not equally available to all Deaf children due to
    economic, political, and geographical disparities. Even with well-supported
    conditions, there is a range of outcomes in spoken language skills among Deaf
    children who use these technologies. Assistive technology can boost spoken
    language acquisition, but does not eliminate all the effects of being Deaf in a
    hearing world.

                                                        Figure 4.1.
                                         Hearing aids and Cochlear implant

    Many children who use cochlear implants or hearing aids do benefit from using
    sign language as an alternate language mode, and as a source of connection
    with other Deaf persons. For this reason, WFD emphasizes that deaf children
    must have visual language access in order to fully achieve their human potential.
    Sign language is the only language that is completely visually accessible (i.e.,
    it is not reliant on technologically-assisted hearing) and WFD advocates for
    "deaf children to have full access to a quality education in their native sign
    language(s), regardless of any technological devices they may use."87

    87 WFD Position Paper on the Language Rights of Deaf Children (2016) https://wfdeaf.org/wp-content/up-
    loads/2017/01/WFD-Position-Paper-on-Language-Rights-of-Deaf-Children-7-Sept-2016.pdf
WHAT IS IT?                                                                       63

Q4. WHAT IS A MAIN LANGUAGE
AND WHAT IS A SECONDARY
LANGUAGE FOR DEAF PERSONS?

Deaf individuals often use a signed language as their main, preferred form
of communication, but will also have knowledge of the major spoken/written
language in their country, depending on their educational background.
Knowledge of language(s) used in wider society (through lip-reading, literacy,
speech) is useful for Deaf persons regarding employment, everyday interaction
in the local community, and access to information. In many contexts around
the world, Deaf individuals may know more than one national sign language
(e.g., those who have travelled, studied or married across national borders),
or they may know different dialects of signing within their country (e.g., as
in Indonesia, India, Thailand and Vietnam). In this sense, Deaf persons are
typically bilingual or plurilingual.

Some Deaf persons who benefit from cochlear implant or hearing aid
technology may alternate between communicating in spoken language and
in signed language, according to the situation. Such bilingual-bimodal Deaf
individuals might choose to use spoken language in a one-to-one or familiar
situation (such as a family gathering, a small workplace, at a shop), but prefer
to use sign language socially in the Deaf community and to access information
in a larger, more complex situation such as a meeting, a classroom, or a public
event by using a sign language interpreter.

Like people everywhere, Deaf individuals' language skills, choices and
strategies vary according to their personal language background, the
communication norms of their particular society, and the situations in which
they need to communicate.
64

       Box 9. Deaf educator: Sibaji Panda (he/him), Director,
       Happy Hands School for the Deaf, India

           The Happy Hands School for the Deaf (HHSD)88 was established in July 2016 in
           Subarnapur District, State of Odisha, Eastern India. As of October 2021, this boarding
           school had an enrollment of 32 Deaf children aged between three and 12. Around 10
           new pupils enroll every year.
           Panda is the Deaf Director of HHSD. Being a boarder at the school is a required condition
           for admission. Sibaji explains this condition:
           "Being away from their families who are not able to communicate well with them, living
           with other Deaf children and with Deaf staff members, the children immerse in sign
           language from the time they wake up to the time they go to bed. This is the kind of sign
           language environment that Deaf children need for language and cognitive development.
           They also learn life skills and job skills through sign language communication activities."

                                                                                                                         Photo source: Sibaji Panda (he/him)

           HHSD has one hearing teacher and seven Deaf teachers. The hearing teacher is a
           licensed teacher and is responsible for communication with the students' parents, as
           well as managing the finances of the school. The Deaf teachers are studying for their
           Government-accredited teaching qualifications.
           The families of many of the students live in areas without electricity. They are poor and
           HHSD does not collect school fees from the families. Instead, HHSD relies on voluntary
           donations to cover its costs and welcomes Deaf volunteers who might like to help the
           School. Mr Panda, with the cooperation of the Deaf teachers, is tackling the challenge
           of increasing the number of licensed teachers in order to apply for government funding.

                 88 http://hhsd.rurallifeline.in/
                                                                                                                                                                        65

The School was born from Panda's concern about the many problems linked with the
education of deaf children ­ from the schools to teachers and oral-based education. After
100 years of insufficient development, Panda saw that Deaf persons were still suffering from
disparities in education. In response, Panda, with his Deaf brother and a hearing brother, set
up HHSD in their home village -- Shikha Eco Learning Village. HHSD is a fully bilingual school
where signing develops alongside writing. At HHSD, sign language is deemed of paramount
importance.
HHSD is in line with the thrust of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)89 on leaving no
one behind.
The following convey the vision and mission90 of HHSD:

        ­ Non-discrimination.
        ­ All can learn provided the right environment and access to curriculum and learning

             are guaranteed by giving equal importance to Indian Sign Language and written
             English/ocal language; and the individual needs of students.
        ­ Visual education plans lead to better outcome. The education of deaf children is
             the collective responsibility of teachers, students, families and of society at large.
        ­ Inclusion in its real sense is where we feel we belong and are accepted.
Panda is striving to realize the HHSD vision and mission. He hopes to develop a model for
the whole of India of what a school for Deaf children should be like.

89 https://sdgs.un.org/goals
90 http://hhsd.rurallifeline.in/about/
66  SIGN LANGUAGE
WHAT IS IT?                                                           67

                       CHAPTER

    05
              DEAF
    EDUCATION

Q1. What is the education situation of Deaf persons in Asia-Pacific?

Q2. What linguistic conditions support good learning outcomes for 
       Deaf students?
68  SIGN LANGUAGE

    Q1. WHAT IS THE EDUCATION
    SITUATION OF DEAF PERSONS IN
    ASIA-PACIFIC?

    In a submission to the United Nations in 2015 regarding Deaf persons' access
    to education, the World Federation of the Deaf noted the lack of data on deaf
    education in many countries, and made the following general observation:

    "Even though situations vary significantly between countries, the WFD and the
    EUD are concerned about the lack of implementation of the Convention on
    the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, article 24 and the lack of opportunities
    for Deaf leaders and Deaf people to have a say in educational options. The
    WFD Deaf People and Human Rights Report91 revealed that education for
    most Deaf people is provided in oral or total communication (simultaneous
    use of speech and signs) instead of a sign language approach. Since the report
    was launched in 2009, the situation has not improved. This was clearly noted in
    the information received from national deaf communities for this submission.

    The lack of comprehensive data on deaf education is a problem. The available
    information is confined only to quantitative data such as statistics on the number
    of schools for the deaf and enrolment number of deaf students in schools.
    Qualitative data would be important as it reflects the success of educational
    approaches and learning outcomes."92

    In 2009, the WFD reported on the human rights of Deaf people based on
    survey data received from 93 countries (no Pacific nations responded).93 The
    report notes that an estimated 80 percent of the world's Deaf population live
    in developing countries, where deafness is more prevalent due to disease,
    accidents and environmental factors. Survey results indicate that across the 93
    responding countries, 17 per cent of Deaf children attend school, and only 3
    per cent have access to education in sign language using a bilingual approach.
    Deaf children's exclusion from communication and education results in lifelong
    limitations on opportunities for employment and social, cultural and political
    participation.

    A 2019 situation analysis of Deaf persons in 14 Pacific Island countries94
    concludes that:

        · Quality education is inaccessible for most Deaf children;

    91 Haualand, H. and C. Allen 2009. Deaf People and Human Rights, pp. 29-39.
    https://www.rasit.org/files/Deaf-People-and-Human-Rights-Report.pdf
    92 World Federation of the Deaf and European Union of the Deaf (2015). "Submission to United Nations Day of
    General Discussion on the Right to Education of Persons with Disabilities." Helsinki: World Federation of the Deaf.
    http://wfdeaf.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/12/WFD-and-EUD-submission-to-day-of-general-discussion-on-educat-
    ion.pdf.
    93 Haualand H, Allen C. 2009. Deaf People and Human Rights.
    https://www.rasit.org/files/Deaf-People-and-Human-Rights-Report.pdf>.
    94 Jenkin, E, Waters, P, Sen, K, Adam, R. 2019. Deaf People in Pacific Island Countries. Pacific Disability Forum. Online at:
    https://asksource.info/resources/deaf-people-pacific-island-countries-a-design-pacific-deaf-strenthening-program.
WHAT IS IT?                                                                                                          69

    · Teachers lack training in sign language;
    · Early intervention supporting family and child sign language acquisition

         is scarce;
    · There are few interpreters working with Deaf students in school settings.

In some Pacific countries, especially those composed of multiple islands, (e.g.,
Vanuatu and the Solomon Islands), there is no nationally shared sign language
because Deaf individuals live in isolated locations and do not attend schools
together. In these situations, Deaf individuals rely on `home signs' --- these
are basic signs shared with family or village members --- and they have limited
opportunities for social participation or education.

A 2006 study of deaf education in China95 noted a change from paternalistic
treatment of sign language users (including oralist pedagogy) towards a
more `Deaf-led' approach, but noted significant gaps in the training and sign
language competence of teachers and interpreters working with Deaf children,
and limited curriculum options for and expectations of Deaf students at all
levels of education.

A more recent 202196 study reports slow progress on the educational rights
and opportunities of sign language users in China, describing "a fragile trust
between deaf and hearing professionals, a need for continued investigation
on sign language standardization and preservation, and a desire for worldwide
collaboration and inclusion of deaf and hearing scholars in establishing a deaf
university in China." (p 179). The 2021 study also highlights the important link
between supporting sign language documentation, developing institutional
partnership with Deaf organizations, and strengthening sign language use in
education in Asia-Pacific countries:

        "Sign language standardization and dictionary work are ongoing
        challenges faced by other Asian countries (e.g., Indonesia, India,
        Cambodia, Nepal). In these contexts, sign language work must
        benefit deaf communities by protecting and preserving regional sign
        languages97. Article 21 of the United Nations Convention on the Rights
        of Persons with Disabilities refers to involving organizations of Deaf
        people who are actively consulted in issues concerning their lives,
        including their native languages. Each country has unique challenges,
        and therefore it is wise to evaluate language ideologies on a case by
        case basis. Recommendations to improve training and qualifications
        for teachers and interpreters can be met by training deaf instructors of
        sign linguistics and pedagogy, and by including deaf Chinese scholars
        in the planning and development of research and education for deaf
        individuals." (p.196)

95 Lytle R, Johnson KE and Hui YJ. (2006). Deaf Education in China: History, Current Issues and Emerging Deaf Voic-
es. American Annals of the Deaf. 150 (5): 457­69.

96 Jones, GA, Ni D and Wang W. (2021). "Nothing about us without us: Deaf education and sign language access in
China" in Deafness and Education International. 23(3):179­200.

97 Moriarty, Erin Harrelson (2019). "Deaf people with "no language": Mobility and flexible accumulation in languag-
ing practices of deaf people in Cambodia" in Journal of Applied Linguistics Review, Walter de Gruyter GmbH,
Berlin/Boston. Published Online: 2017-10-21. Published in Print: 2019-02-25; Palfreyman, 2019.
70                                        SIGN LANGUAGE

    Q.2 WHAT LINGUISTIC CONDITIONS
    SUPPORT GOOD LEARNING
    OUTCOMES FOR DEAF STUDENTS?

    In terms of language practices, there are three main approaches to deaf
    education:

            1. Teaching in the medium of spoken/ written language only- known as
                 the oral-aural approach.

            2. Teaching through speaking simultaneously with an artificial system
                 of signs that `match' each spoken word - known as the combined
                 method, for example, `Signed Putonghua' (see Lytle et al 2006).

            3. Teaching in a native signed language with instruction in the written
                 and/or spoken language of society - known as a bilingual-bimodal
                 approach.

         Figure 5.1          Figure 5.2             Figure 5.3
    Oral-aural approach  Combined method  Bilingual-bimodal approach

    Until the mid- to late-20th century, deaf education in many countries favored
    the oral-aural approach. The oral-aural approach prohibited the use of sign
    language and aimed to "normalize" deaf children towards speaking and
    behaving like hearing people. As a result, this produced high rates of failure
    among children who could not hear. Under these educational conditions,
    generations of students used and passed on sign language privately among
    themselves during breaks and in their boarding residences. It is strongly held
    in Deaf cultural lore that oralist education delivered poor educational and
    psychological outcomes for most Deaf children.98

    98 Ladd, P. (2003). Understanding Deaf Culture: In Search of Deafhood. Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters; McKee, R.
    (2001). People of the Eye. Stories from the Deaf World. Wellington: Bridget Williams Books.
WHAT IS IT?                                                                                                       71

The combined method is not generally favored by Deaf persons either
because the style of signing conflicts with the visual grammar and lexical
variation of natural signed languages as used by Deaf communities. It is also
reliant on knowing the structure of spoken language and is often executed
poorly by teachers, making the signs difficult to follow without hearing speech.
Artificially standardized sign systems which suppress dialectal variation are
often imposed by educational authorities and resisted by Deaf communities.99

The Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the WFD Position
Paper on the Language Rights of Deaf Children are mutually reinforcing in
underscoring the importance of bilingual-bimodal education which uses the
sign language of the national Deaf community. However, WFD points out that:

        "Other barriers to the effective education of deaf children include
        a lack of trained teachers (including deaf teachers as role models), a
        lack of teachers who are fluent in sign language and lack of a learning
        environment and pedagogy that is conducive to deaf students' effective
        learning. Bilingual or multilingual education does not itself guarantee
        educational outcomes - it must be quality education."100

An international trend towards inclusive education policy, including in the Asia-
Pacific region, is of great concern to WFD, due to widespread problems with
the definition of `inclusive' and practical implementation for Deaf children.
Chiefly, these are the assumption that inclusion equates with mainstream
placement, a lack of specialist teaching (teachers proficient in sign language
and skilled in teaching bilingually) and lack of a shared signing environment
and peers in regular schools:101 102 103

        "Schools in which the majority of students are hearing may present
        barriers to deaf students, in that they lack the supportive and inclusive
        signing environments that deaf students require to thrive and to acquire
        a strong sense of linguistic and cultural identity."104

The WFD asserts that mainstream school placement may be the opposite of
`inclusive.' The 2018 WFD Position Paper on Inclusive Education stresses that
specialized schools and spaces in which Deaf children learn together in sign
language may be a better realization of the intent of the CRPD:

99 See WFD (2007) statement on this issue:
https://wfdeaf.org/news/resources/statement-on-the-unification-of-sign-languages-january-2007/.

100 World Federation of the Deaf (2016). "WFD Position Paper on the Language Rights of Deaf Children," p. 2:
https://wfdeaf.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/01/WFD-Position-Paper-on-Language-Rights-of-Deaf-Children-7-
Sept-2016.pdf.

101 Snoddon, Kristin. 2019. "Report on Baseline Data Collection on Deaf Education in Nepal." World Federation of
the Deaf. Retrieved 17 October 2021 from:
https://wfdeaf.org/news/resources/report-baseline-data-collection-deaf-education-nepal/.

102 Jones, GA, Ni D and Wang W. 2021. "Nothing about us without us: Deaf education and sign language access in
China" in Deafness and Education International. 23(3):179­200.

103 World Federation of the Deaf. 2018. "WFD Position Paper on Inclusive Education":
https://wfdeaf.org/news/resources/5-june-2018-wfd-position-paper-inclusive-education/.

104 World Federation of the Deaf (2016). "WFD Position Paper on Language Rights of Deaf Children," p. 2:
http://wfdeaf.org/news/resources/wfd-position-paper-on-the-language-rights-of-deaf-children-7-september-2016/.
72  SIGN LANGUAGE

            "Deaf learners have a unique need for instruction in sign language,
            opportunities to study sign language and deaf culture, and opportunities
            to participate with their peers in congregated settings that allow for
            linguistic and cultural development. (...) These rights are outlined in
            Article 24(3[c]) of the CRPD, which states: "the education of persons, and
            in particular children, who are blind, deaf, or deafblind, is delivered in the
            most appropriate languages and modes and means of communication
            for the individual, and in environments which maximize academic and
            social development." (...)

            Moreover, Article 24(4) calls for States Parties to "take appropriate
            measures to employ teachers, including teachers with disabilities, who
            are qualified in sign language." This means that the right of Deaf learners
            to have Deaf teachers is supported by the CRPD.

    Regardless of the education model followed, WFD deems it "essential that
    deaf teachers enjoy an equal role with hearing teachers and that all teachers
    have near-native sign language fluency."

    By "qualified in sign language," WFD explains that teachers of Deaf children
    need "near-native levels of proficiency" in a sign language.

    The WFD Position Paper on Inclusive Education also clarifies that providing sign
    language interpreters in regular schools "does not replace direct instruction
    in sign language or a fully accessible sign language environment. Provision
    of an interpreter is not bilingual education but rather education in a majority
    language mediated by an interpreter." (p.4).

    Essentially, the WFD Position Paper on Inclusive Education (reinforced by the
    CRPD) reflects Deaf cultural knowledge that sign language and Deaf identity
    naturally exist in communities of Deaf people, and that inclusive bilingual
    learning therefore ideally takes place in a collective situation where linguistic
    and cultural identity is shared.
                                                                                                                                                             73

Box 10. Vitalizing Deaf sports: Deaflympian and physical education
teacher of Deaf children, Elvira Ligay (she/her), Uzbekistan

Deaf persons from all over the world come together to compete in sporting events called "Deaflympics"
which is recognized by the International Olympic Committee.105 Elvira Ligay has been representing
Uzbekistan in athletics and volleyball since 1986. In that capacity, Elvira has participated thrice in the
Deaflympic Summer Games: Rome (2001), Chinese Taipei (2009) and Sofia (2013).

                                                     Elvira has been teaching physical education at
                                                     Tashkent Specialized Boarding School no. 101
                                                     for Deaf Children for over 28 years. There, she
                                                     teaches Deaf students the rules of sporting
                                                     codes, how to enjoy sports and how to improve
                                                     their performance, nurturing future athletes.

Photo source:Elvira Ligay                            In 2004, Elvira attended the JICA Training Course
                                                     for Deaf Leaders in Japan. In the Course, Elvira
                                                     learned about the living conditions of and the
                                                     welfare system for Deaf persons in Japan and
                                                     other countries.

She also learned International Sign during the Course.Building on the knowledge and experience
gained, Elvira has been working as an International Sign interpreter for Deaf-blind persons in
Uzbekistan when they participate in competitions.

Elvira holds an executive position in the Sports Federation of the Deaf of Uzbekistan. The Sports
Federation promotes sporting activities for Deaf persons by organizing sporting events, such as
football, volleyball, table tennis, taekwondo and chess.

Elvira believes that the challenge is to raise the
status of Deaflympics so that Deaflympians receive
support that is on par with that accorded to those
participating in the Olympic and Paralympic
Games and to ensure that the Government of
Uzbekistan understands the importance of sports
for Deaf persons.

In recognition of her contributions, Elvira was      Photo: Training Deaf Uzbeks in a tug-of-war
elected in 2021 to the Executive Board of the Asia-                          Photo source:Elvira Ligay
Pacific Deaf Sports Confederation (APDSC).106 In
her new role, Elvira is actively working on raising
the profile of Deaf sports in Uzbekistan and at the
Asia-Pacific level.

105 Founded in 1924 and known as the CISS (Comité International des Sports des Sourds), the International Committee of Sports for the Deaf (ICSD) is the
main governing body responsible for the organization of Deaflympics and other World Deaf Championships. ICSD is now approaching the century mark
of being the organization building, evolving and fortifying the tradition of inviting Deaf/Hard of Hearing elite athletes from all of the world to come to-
gether not only to compete in their respective sports, but also to develop comradeships between their countries. Source: https://www.deaflympics.com/.

106 Accessed on 12 November 2021: https://www.apdeafsports.org/20210609_001.php.
APDSC membership is composed of the following: Afghanistan; Australia; Bangladesh; China; Chinese Taipei; Fiji; Hong Kong, China; India; Indonesia;
Iran (Islamic Republic of); Japan; Kazakhstan; Kyrgyzstan; Macau, China; Malaysia; Mongolia; Nepal; New Zealand; Pakistan; Philippines; Republic of Ko-
rea; Singapore; Thailand; Turkmenistan; and Uzbekistan. The membership also includes Bahrain, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Palestine, Saudi Arabia,
United Arab Emirates and Yemen.
74  SIGN LANGUAGE
                             CHAPTER

     06
                   SIGN
        LANGUAGE
INTERPRETATION

             Q1. How do communication and information barriers impact
                   Deaf persons?

             Q2. Who are sign language interpreters?

             Q3. How many trained sign language interpreters are available in
                   Asia-Pacific?

             Q4. Why is it important to professionalize sign language interpreting?

             Q5. Who pays for sign language interpreting?

             Q6. What is the difference between remote interpreting and telephone
                    relay service?

             Q7. Is sign language interpreting unnecessary when there is captioning?
76  SIGN LANGUAGE

    Q1. HOW DO COMMUNICATION
    AND INFORMATION BARRIERS
    IMPACT DEAF PERSONS?

    As in other parts of the world, Deaf persons in the Asia-Pacific region
    experience barriers to information and communication in many areas of daily
    life. Those include education, healthcare, justice, broadcasting, social services,
    commerce, employment, recreation and civic events. The situation differs from
    country to country, as also the ways in which the barriers are addressed.

    Regarding Kyrgyzstan, for example, sign language is legally recognized and
    protected by the law; the need for sign language interpretation is written into
    the law. Article 3 of the 2008 Law on Rights of and Guarantees for Persons with
    Disabilities107 obliges the Government to provide sign language interpretation
    in areas of education and health care, in court proceedings, in the provision of
    State and municipal services and in other areas, with the purpose of protecting
    and promoting the rights of persons with disabilities. The law also obliges the
    Government to provide training to sign language interpreters, teachers and
    speech therapists and to ensure the inclusion of sign language in the media108.
    The United Nations Special Rapporteur for Minority Issues has noted that it is
    the Kyrgyz Society of the Blind and Deaf that supplies the Government with
    sign language interpreters, including for court proceedings. Despite positive
    comments about the work of the Kyrgyz Society of the Blind and Deaf, its roster
    only has four Bishkek-based sign language interpreters and there remains a
    shortage of trained sign language teachers.

    Furthermore, there is no Government programme in place for the provision
    of sign language interpretation in hospitals and other medical centres, and
    Deaf persons are obliged to be accompanied either by their own interpreter
    or by a hearing relative who can facilitate communication with the medical
    personnel. It is the understanding of the Special Rapporteur that this is the
    case in most public services, with the exception of education and court
    proceedings. There is, therefore, a need for stronger government support,
    including adequate public funding and State involvement in the provision of
    sign language interpretation, and the development and implementation of
    training programmes for sign language interpreters109. The Special Rapporteur
    has recommended that the Government of Kyrgyzstan provides Deaf persons
    with additional support for employment through job creation and the award
    of tenders.

    107 Source: ILO NATLEX Database of national labour, social security and related human rights legislation. Law No. 38
    of 3 April 2008 "On the Rights and Guarantees of Persons with Disabilities," as amended to 8 June 2017.
    https://www.ilo.org/dyn/natlex/natlex4.detail?p_lang=en&p_isn=106993&p_count=6&p_classification=08.

    108 United Nations, 2021. Visit to Kyrgyzstan: Report of the Special Rapporteur on minority issues, Fernand de Va-
    rennes, 28 January 2021, para 63, A/HRC/46/57/Add.1 - E https://undocs.org/A/HRC/46/57/Add.1; in
    https://www.ohchr.org/EN/HRBodies/HRC/RegularSessions/Session46/Pages/ListReports.aspx.

    109 Ibid.., para. 64.
WHAT IS IT?                                                                       77

The Special Rapporteur has urged the Government of Kyrgyzstan to "recognize
sign language as a fully-fledged language and guarantee access to public
services and the use of sign languages in areas such as education and health
care." He has also recommended stronger government planning and support,
including adequate public funding and State involvement, in the provision
of sign language services, as well as the development and implementation
of training programmes for sign language interpreters. A first national plan
for the use of, and teaching in, sign language in education has been strongly
urged for 2022.110

Sign language interpretation is an essential service to enable communication
between Deaf sign language users and those who do not use sign language.

Situations in which a Deaf person might require the services of a sign language
interpreter include the following, when:

  · Interacting with health care personnel for a medical check-up or
        treatment at a health care facility;

  · Making enquiries about items of interest at commercial outlets (e.g.,
        medicines and supplements at a pharmacy);

  · Interacting in diverse ways and situations with the police, other members
        of the justice system or civil defence personnel;

  · Participating in on-site inspection of a road crash;
  · Making a police report;
  · Seeking or receiving legal advice;
  · Giving witness testimony;
  · Going to trial;
  · Participating in school education / vocational training programme;
  · Attending an ad hoc skill development course;
  · Interviewing for a job;
  · Attending a meeting or training event at work;
  · Attending a town hall meeting or an election rally;
  · Participating in a community event (e.g., a fundraiser rally / community

        cleaning or tree planting);
  · Participating in disaster risk reduction planning and drills;
  · Participating in sports training and competitions;
  · Attending an event where an important person or guest of honour

        delivers a speech, presentation or lecture;
  · Making a phone call;
  · Negotiating a bank loan;
  · Leasing, renting, buying high-value assets (e.g., land, living quarters or a

        vehicle) and gathering information prior to making a decision;

110 Ibid.., para. 107.
78  SIGN LANGUAGE

      · Discussing important matters with hearing family members who do not
            know sign language;

      · Attending a family event, e.g., during celebration of a festival, a wedding
            or a funeral.

    To make information accessible, sign language interpretation is required in the
    following situations, for example:

      · All announcements of breaking news with national and local implications,
            especially important government announcements;

      · TV news programmes;
      · Public events, such as community festivals or commemorations;
      · Debates for local, State / provincial government policy/office and

            parliamentary elections;
      · Evacuation warnings and instructions in the event of a disaster.

    Recently, many countries have regularized the provision of sign language
    interpretation at government press conferences to communicate information
    updates on the status of the COVID-19 pandemic and related standard
    operating procedures for public health.
WHAT IS IT?                                                                          79

Q2. WHO ARE SIGN LANGUAGE
INTERPRETERS?

Improving information accessibility and supporting communication are
indispensable elements for Deaf persons to engage fully in social participation.
A person who is trained to interpret between spoken language and signed
language is called a sign language interpreter.

                                                    Figure 6.1
               A Deaf inpatient, sign language interpreter, and a speaking doctor

Sign language interpreters need to be highly skilled in both a spoken and
signed language. They have to demonstrate proficiency in interpreting
techniques, professional ethics and experiential knowledge of working in
diverse settings.

In situations where there is a lack or no interpreter training and services, family
members or school teachers often act as volunteer interpreters, with varying
levels of skill. Sign language courses and interpreter training courses are now
increasingly available in higher education institutions, including government-
sponsored training courses, and sign language interpreting has become more
professionalized in societies that understand the importance of sign language.

Systems of interpreter training and service provision vary from country to
country. In Japan, for example, sign language `aides' are trained at the
municipal level and sign language interpreters are trained at the prefectural
level. Sign language interpreting qualifications are granted at both prefectural
and national levels111. As of November 2021, there are 3,831 sign language
interpreters who have qualified at the national level, but it is not known

111 http://www.jyoubun-center.or.jp/slit/list/
80  SIGN LANGUAGE

    whether all of these are working as sign language interpreters. Even where
    there are qualified sign language interpreters, stable job opportunities are few.
    Working conditions and standards remain an issue in many places, especially
    where interpreting services are not consistently required and state resources
    for this may not be readily available when required.

    It is not only hearing people who work as sign language interpreters. Deaf
    persons also work as interpreters in certain contexts. Trained Deaf interpreters
    may be included in an interpreting team to provide a more expanded
    interpretation for Deaf individuals who have limited education and/or gaps
    in their language proficiency or who, for other reasons, will benefit from
    communication support from a Deaf peer. Some Deaf interpreters may work
    on communication between their native sign language and a foreign sign
    language, to support Deaf migrants or other Deaf persons in an international
    situation. Other Deaf interpreters work with Deafblind individuals to relay
    communication through tactile signing which is a specialized skill.

    The Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities stipulates the need
    for states to provide professional sign language interpreting services in Article
    9 (Information Accessibility) and Article 21 (Communication).

    Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, Article 9 on
    accessibility, 9.2:

    States Parties shall also take appropriate measures to:

    (e) Provide forms of live assistance and intermediaries, including guides,
    readers and professional sign language interpreters, to facilitate accessibility
    to buildings and other facilities open to the public;

    Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, Article 21,
    Freedom of expression and opinion, and access to information

    States Parties shall take all appropriate measures to ensure that persons
    with disabilities can exercise the right to freedom of expression and opinion,
    including the freedom to seek, receive and impart information and ideas on an
    equal basis with others and through all forms of communication of their choice,
    as defined in article 2 of the present Convention, including by:

    21.b Accepting and facilitating the use of sign languages, Braille, augmentative
    and alternative communication, and all other accessible means, modes and
    formats of communication of their choice by persons with disabilities in official
    interactions;

    Regarding sign language interpreters, the Incheon Strategy to "Make the Right
    Real" for Persons with Disabilities in Asia and the Pacific specifies the number of
    sign language interpreters as one of the indicators for tracking progress towards
    the achievement of "Goal 3, Enhance access to the physical environment,
    public transportation, knowledge, information and communication."
WHAT IS IT?                                                                                                         81

Q3. HOW MANY TRAINED SIGN
LANGUAGE INTERPRETERS ARE
AVAILABLE IN ASIA-PACIFIC?

Accurate data on the number of sign language interpreters working in Asia-
Pacific countries are difficult to obtain. A survey of deaf and interpreting
organizations in 20 countries and territories of the Asia-Pacific region was
conducted by WASLI in 2018.112 Survey responses indicated that while countries
and territories, such as the Democratic Republic of Korea; Japan; Macau,
China; Malaysia; Nepal; Singapore; and Thailand could report the number of
interpreters known to be working, other populous countries, including China,
India, Indonesia and the Philippines, could not provide accurate numbers.
The number of interpreters in proportion to national populations apparently
varies greatly. For example, the Democratic Republic of Korea reported
approximately 2000 employed interpreters, whilst Cambodia reported eight,
and Indonesia estimated the ratio of interpreters to Deaf persons to be 1:7000.

As mentioned, these figures are likely to be "best estimates" in many cases.
Overall, it is safe to say that Deaf persons in the Asian and Pacific region
are under-served for sign language interpreting. The stage of development
of interpreter training, certification and employment arrangements varies
between countries. Across the board, these steps towards providing
professional interpreting services which enable access for Deaf persons remain
"in progress" and require further resourcing.

Sign Language Interpreting in East and North-East Asia

Republic of Korea

In 1999, the Korean Sign Language Research Association was established.
Since 2002, it has been possible to study sign language interpreting at college
or university level.113

See Chapter 7 on Legal Provisions of Sign Language Interpreting, Republic of
Korea.

China

In China, following the 2018 publication of the Lexicon of Common Expressions
in Standard National Sign Language, the China Association of the Deaf and
Hard of Hearing (CADHH) has been conducting regular training on Standard

112 Information is based on an unpublished summary of data from a survey of "The situation of sign language inter-
preting" in the Asia-Pacific region, made available by the WASLI Asia Pacific Regional Representative in November
2021. This description of the regional situation is confirmed by personal communication (4 Dec 2021) with Dr Debra
Russell, WASLI President 2011-2019.
113 Sung-Eun Hong, Hyunhwa Lee, Mi-Hye Lee and Seung-Il Byun (2019). "The Korean Sign Language Act," Chapter
2 in Maartje De Meulder, Joseph J. Murray, Rachel L. McKee (2019). The Legal Recognition of Sign Languages:
Advocacy and Outcomes Around the World. Multilingual Matters, Bristol, U.K..
82  SIGN LANGUAGE

    National Sign Language (Chinese Sign Language). Each year, CADHH trains
    about 600 people. Each batch of 600, in turn, serves as provincial-level trainers
    who transmit what they have learned, via training conducted under the
    auspices of local associations of Deaf persons and Hard-of-Hearing persons.
    About 250,000 persons have participated in such training, conducted online
    and offline across much of the country. They are mainly the Deaf staff members
    of associations of Deaf persons and Hard-of-Hearing persons, Chinese Sign
    Language interpreters, and special school teachers. The training covers
    the promotion of Chinese Sign Language, policies regarding Chinese Sign
    Language, knowledge of Chinese Sign Language linguistics, the Lexicon
    of Common Expressions in Standard National Sign Language, and skills in
    Chinese Sign Language interpretation.

    Colleges and universities, such as the Chongqing Normal University, Zhejiang
    Vocational College of Special Education, Nanjing Normal University of Special
    Education, and Zhengzhou University of Technology, have established Chinese
    Sign Language interpretation programmes. Furthermore, since 2018, Beijing
    Normal University, Nanjing Normal University of Special Education and
    CADHH have trained about 2,000 Chinese Sign Language interpreters and
    teachers working in deaf schools across the country. There are also companies
    and institutions that provide Chinese Sign Language services.
WHAT IS IT?                                                                            83

Q4. WHY IS IT IMPORTANT TO
PROFESSIONALIZE SIGN LANGUAGE
INTERPRETING?

Deaf persons' participation in society is regularly facilitated by interpreters
who translate between spoken and signed language. It is therefore vital that
Deaf individuals and societal organizations that need to be accessible can be
assured that sign language interpreters will be competent, ethical and provide
service at an agreed professional standard. Professional training, assessment
and the regulation of standards to work as an interpreter are key elements in
achieving Deaf persons' accessibility rights under article 9, Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities. Without the implementation of professional
standards for interpreting services, there are significant risks to Deaf individuals
and to public service providers from potential miscommunication or unethical
conduct. Training with certification helps ensure the availability of qualified
interpreters for meeting service needs. It is an incentive for attracting individuals
to opt for sign language interpreting as a professional career.

The World Association of Sign Language Interpreters (WASLI) is an international
membership organization that advances professionalization by developing and
promoting standards for high quality training, education and assessment of
sign language interpreters worldwide. WASLI views the role of sign language
interpreters as workers who support the human rights of Deaf persons.114

WASLI (as of 29 November 2021) has 65 members --- i.e., professional
associations of sign language interpreters --- whose existence is indicative of
the status of the profession.115 There are 13 WASLI members in the ESCAP
region: six in East and North-East Asia (Democratic People's Republic of Korea;
Japan; Mongolia; Republic of Korea and Taiwan, China); three in the Pacific
(Australia, Fiji and New Zealand); two in South and South-West Asia (India and
Nepal); one in South-East Asia (Philippines); one in North and Central Asia
(Russian Federation).

Japan is unique in having two WASLI members: Japanese Sign Language
Interpreters (JASLI) and the National Research Association for Sign Language
Interpretation (NRASLI). The Korean peninsula is fully represented by the Sign
Language Interpreters' Association of Korea (SLIAK) of the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea and the Korean Association of Sign Language Interpreters of
the Republic of Korea.

One WASLI member in the Pacific, the Sign Language Interpreters Association
of New Zealand (SLIANZ),116 was established in 1995 to represent and advance
the sign language interpreting profession in New Zealand. SLIANZ members
commit to upholding the seven general principles of its Code of Ethics:

114 https://wasli.org/
115 https://wasli.org/wasli-national-members
116 https://slianz.org.nz/
84                                                                                             SIGN LANGUAGE

    Professional Conduct, Confidentiality, Competence, Accuracy, Impartiality,
    Clarity of Role Boundaries and Professional Development.117 The Association
    maintains formal qualification as the standard for entry to the profession, offers
    continuing professional development, as well as advises on working conditions
    for interpreters and related issues. SLIANZ provides a representative voice for
    New Zealand Sign Language (NZSL) interpreters and a vehicle to maintain
    relationships with Deaf and other allied organizations.

    On its website, SLIANZ describes the link between the development of an
    interpreting profession and increasing sign language recognition and the
    participation of Deaf persons in society:

            "In April 2006 the New Zealand Sign Language Act gave official
            recognition to NZSL, alongside Mori and English. For most of the
            20th century, NZSL was stigmatised within society, leaving Deaf people
            reluctant to use sign language in public. The NZSL Act did not directly
            increase provision for interpreting, but highlighted the Deaf community's
            historical exclusion from proper access to education and public life
            through sign language. The development of interpreting services, and
            of a professional identity via SLIANZ, have in turn helped raise the profile
            of NZSL and contributed to changing public understanding about Deaf
            people by enabling greater participation in public domains."118

    Due to efforts under way in Indonesia, South-East Asia may expect to have
    a second WASLI member. The WASLI President, Christopher Stone, and
    Deaf Interpreter Advisor, Arnas Brazinskas, were invited by the Indonesian
    Association of the Deaf to support the establishment of a national interpreter
    association. The meeting was attended by Deaf and hearing representatives
    of the NAD, the national interpreting agency, and senior interpreting
    professionals.119

    WASLI also works at the regional level to foster information sharing and
    collaboration among its members, to achieve mutual goals. Its goals include
    establishing interpreter training and accreditation, as well as developing
    national associations and collaborative relationships with national Deaf
    organizations. For example, in June 2021, an Asia-Pacific WASLI forum
    involved 60 participants from 13 countries and territories (China; Hong
    Kong, China; India; Indonesia; Japan; Malaysia; Nepal; Philippines; Republic
    of Korea; Singapore; Sri Lanka; Thailand; Viet Nam). The forum and other
    regional communications addressed issues such as training curricula, code of
    ethics, establishing a registration system, setting up a national association,
    and developing leadership in the interpreting profession.120 Such `bottom-up'
    efforts at local, regional and international levels make important contributions
    to improving Deaf communities' practical rights to quality interpreting services.

    117 https://slianz.org.nz/working-with-interpreters/code-of-ethics-code-of-conduct/

    118 https://slianz.org.nz/about-slianz/

    119 WASLI Newsletter 28 November 2021:
    https://wasli.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/11/WASLI-Newsletter-Nov-2021.pdf.

    120 Report on Asia Region, pp 15-16, in WASLI Annual Report 2020-2021, dated 6 July 2021:
    http://wasli.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/07/WASLI-Annual-Report-2020-21-3.pdf;
    https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DCEKdeynJX8.
WHAT IS IT?                                                                                                        85

WASLI support for sign language development in the ESCAP region includes
the following: WASLI has embarked on discussions with sign language
interpreters in Uzbekistan regarding online interpreting training, as well as sign
language interpreting issues in vocational training and professional colleges.121
Following long negotiations, a WASLI letter of support for Georgian Sign
Language has been sent to the Georgian Union of the Deaf including the
appeal to the WFD and the European Union of the Deaf.122 WASLI has set
up a working group in the Pacific to establish interpreter training. Among the
members are the President of WFD Oceania and a representative of the Fiji
Association of the Deaf.123

WASLI and WFD have signed a memorandum of understanding. Both have
jointly issued the WFD-WASLI International Sign Accreditation Handbook124
which aims to introduce readers to the WFD-WASLI International Sign
Interpreter Accreditation and its implementation and monitoring process. The
WFD 70th anniversary webinar series highlighted the need for collaboration
between Deaf associations, Interpreters associations, and other stakeholders,
to ensure appropriate interpreter training, service provision and legal
entitlements.125

WASLI Asia Region has conducted an event on collaboration and cooperation
between National Deaf Associations and Interpreter associations.126 Both the
Presidents of the WFD and WASLI have joined the WFD Regional Secretariat
Asia and the WASLI Regional Representative (RR) and Regional Deaf
Interpreter Advisor (RDIA) to discuss interpreting and collaboration in the
region. This enabled them to gather some demographic information from the
representatives present to ascertain an idea of the number of Deaf persons, the
numbers of interpreters overall, and the number of Deaf interpreters working
at the country/territory level

Furthermore, WFD-WASLI collaboration has yielded the following substantive
documentation:

  · WFD-WASLI Joint Statement on Access to Health Services and
        Interpreter Occupational Health;127

  · WFD Position Paper on Accessibility: Sign Language Interpreting and
        translation and technological developments.128

121 Ibid.., p. 20.

122 Ibid.., p. 2

123 Ibid.., p.17.

124 https://wfdeaf.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/WFD-WASLI-IS-Interpreter-Accreditation_Handbook-31.8.pdf

125 WASLI Annual Report 2020-2021, dated 6 July 2921, Ibid., p. 4.

126 Ibid.., p. 4.

1273 March 2020: WFD-WASLI Joint Statement on Access to Health Services & Interpreter Occupational Health
During the Coronavirus (COVID 19) Containment Efforts.
http://2tdzpf2t7hxmggqhq3njno1y-wpengine.netdna-ssl.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/WFD_WASLI-Covid19-
Deaf-and-interpreter-safety-March-2020.pdf.

128 12 February 2019: WFD Position Paper on Accessibility: Sign Language Interpreting and translation and techno-
logical developments.https://2tdzpf2t7hxmggqhq3njno1y-wpengine.netdna-ssl.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/07/
WFD-Postion-Paper-on-Accessbility-12-Feb-2019-Updated.pdf.
86  SIGN LANGUAGE

    This section introduces the sign language interpreting certification system
    in Japan. In Japan, the training and availability of on-call (freelance) and
    employed sign language interpreters began nationwide in the 1970s. The first
    certification system for sign language interpreters began in 1976[IK1] , with the
    National Sign Language Interpreter Certification Examination administered by
    the Japanese Federation of the Deaf. In 1989, the Ministry of Health, Labor
    and Welfare officially introduced a national examination system to accredit
    Japanese Government Sign Language Interpreters. The chart below outlines
    the three major sign language-related qualifications available in Japan:
    Japanese Government Sign Language Interpreter, Local Government Sign
    Language Interpreter, and Sign Language `Aides'.

        A sign language interpreter usually wears plain-coloured attire
                    (in this case, dark clothing) and stands against a plain

    background to set off more clearly the contrast of hands and face
        that Deaf persons focus on during sign language interpreting.

    Photo source: Samuel CHEW Kai Mun, professional ASL, BIM and
                                                                          IS interpreter.
WHAT IS IT?                                                                                87

Table 6.1 The Sign Language Interpretation Certification System in Japan

Name of        Shuwa                Shuwa                 Shuwa
                                    Tsuyaku-sha           Hoshiin
certification in Tsuyaku-shi                              

Japanese       

Type of        Japanese             Local Government      Sign Language `Aides'
certification
               Government Sign Sign Language

               Language Interpreter Interpreter

Year of        1989                 1998                  1970129
enactment

Governing law Physical Disability   Comprehensive         Comprehensive Support Act for
                       Welfare Law  Support Act for       Persons with Disabilities
                                    Persons with
                                    Disabilities

Training       National             Local governments     Local governments
providers                                                 (prefectures, ordinance-
               Rehabilitation Center (prefectures and     designated and core cities, and
                                                          other local municipalities)
               Academy for Persons ordinance-designated

               with Disabilities    and core cities)

Certification Information and       Local governments     Certificate of program
Examination Culture Center for      (prefectures and      completion provided
Administrators the Deaf             ordinance-designated
                                    and core cities)

Certifiers     Minister of Health,  Local governments     Local governments
               Labor and Welfare    (prefectures and      (prefectures, ordinance-
                                    ordinance-designated  designated and core cities, and
                                    and core cities)      other local municipalities)

Qualification  Persons who have Varies by municipality. Those who have completed the
Conditions
               passed the Japanese In many cases, a sign "Sign Languagew

               Government Sign language interpreter `Aides' Training Course"

               Language Interpreter becomes certified after conducted by the prefecture,

               Certificate          passing the "National government-designated city, or

               Examination          Standard Examination municipality.

                                    for Sign Language

                                    Interpreters"

                                    administered by

                                    Japan National

                                    Center of Sign

                                    Language Education

                                    and/or certification

                                    examinations

                                    conducted by local

                                    governments

129 https://www.jfd.
or.jp/info/2006/20060420-skckrep-1.pdf 
https://www.com-sagano.com/about/hojin/igi
88                                                                   SIGN LANGUAGE

    Name of         Shuwa                   Shuwa                    Shuwa
                                            Tsuyaku-sha              Hoshiin
    certification in Tsuyaku-shi                                     

    Japanese        

    Services scope  Interpretation          Community-based          Those who have completed
                    services are            interpreting services    are considered to have
                    conducted in            are provided in          acquired basic sign language
                    the registered          the registered           skills at the level of day-to-
                    municipalities.         municipalities in a      day conversation, and are
                    Japanese                wide range of settings   eligible to work as `aides' of
                    Government Sign         including hospital/      the deaf. Although they are not
                    Language Interpreter    medical appointments,    qualified as interpreters, some
                    certification is        civil service            municipalities allow them to
                    required in situations  appointments, parent-    provide interpretation.
                    that require            teacher meetings, job
                    advanced skills, such   interview and training,
                    as political press      and ceremonies such
                    conferences and         as weddings and
                    judicial proceedings.   funerals.
                    Some municipalities
                    require Japanese
                    Government Sign
                    Language Interpreter
                    certification in
                    order to register
                    as a sign language
                    interpreter, such as
                    in Tokyo[IK4] . Thus,
                    nationally certified
                    interpreters have
                    more opportunities
                    to work than
                    locally qualified
                    interpreters.

    Number of       3,831 interpreters as 8,000 interpreters as      18,700 `aides' as of 2014132
    registrants     of February 2021130 of 2014131

    130 http://www.jyoubun-center.or.jp/slit/list/

    131  
    
    https://www.mhlw.go.jp/file/05-Shingikai-12601000-Seisakutoukatsukan-Sanjikanshitsu_Shakaihoshoutantou/0000096735.pdf

    132 
WHAT IS IT?                                                                        89

Q5. WHO PAYS FOR SIGN
LANGUAGE INTERPRETING?

Demand for sign language interpreters is increasing due to the expansion of
rights for Deaf persons to participate in society. However, in many cases, the
allocation of budgetary and other resources to provide this service has not
been sufficiently planned for.

The actual cost of sign language interpreting varies by country, subregion and
by the type of context (e.g., healthcare, conference and legal interpreting may
involve different rates of remuneration).

There are various practices and approaches to funding interpreting. State
parties that have ratified the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities have a responsibility to provide resourcing and infrastructure to
meet accessibility commitments, which includes provision of (beyond the `right
to') professional sign language interpreting. From the viewpoint of equalizing
opportunities for Deaf persons to participate in society, government or
companies should bear the cost of sign language interpretation rather than
Deaf individuals or charitable organizations. In healthcare, for example, a
government could contract sign language interpreters to attend consultations
in public health facilities to ensure that Deaf persons receive, with clear
communication, medical advice and treatment. Arrangements for the booking
and payment of interpreters in `core' services (such as health, justice, welfare,
education and employment) will depend on each country's scale of population
and distribution of Deaf persons, existing public funding systems, the specific
provisions of laws and policies that regulate rights to services in the domains
where interpreting is required. Most countries have mixed models of paying
for interpreting ­ for example, sign language interpreters working in schools,
courts, or in Deaf individual's workplaces are likely to be contracted and
remunerated in different ways.

National and regional governments are encouraged to develop systems that
link the training, certification, employment arrangements and continuing
education of sign language interpreters.
90  SIGN LANGUAGE

    Q6. WHAT IS THE DIFFERENCE
    BETWEEN REMOTE INTERPRETING
    AND TELEPHONE RELAY SERVICE?

    Depending on the situation in which the Deaf person requires access, sign
    language interpretation can be provided face-to-face or remotely. For
    example, when a Deaf person goes to the hospital for a medical examination,
    it is usually best to have an interpreter present in the room. However, if an
    onsite interpreter is not available due to insufficient notice or other reasons, an
    option is to tap the services of a remote interpreter using a video phone. During
    the COVID-19 pandemic, the physical presence of onsite interpreters has been
    restricted, as part of general measures for everyone to reduce infection risk.133

    Consequently, the demand for remote interpretation is increasing, creating
    a need to improve video communication systems and adapt interpreting
    techniques. It is also necessary to raise awareness of how to work with
    interpreters in this evolving situation.

    Apart from remote interpretation, many countries provide telephone relay
    services. This is a service in which the operator (a trained interpreter) relays
    the conversation when a Deaf person calls a hearing person or a hearing
    person calls a Deaf person over the phone (or online video app in the case of
    Deaf callers). By enabling Deaf persons to make and receive phone calls, this
    telephone relay service is a way of achieving full participation and equality of
    Deaf persons in the field of telecommunications.

    The accuracy of automatic translation and interpretation between spoken
    languages is increasing due to many years of research. In contrast, research
    into automatic translation and interpretation between spoken and signed
    languages is at a nascent stage. There are some difficult challenges in how to
    enable sign language to be read by a computer, how to generate computer
    graphics for sign language and how to achieve translation that can be
    understood by Deaf persons with widely varying levels of literacy, knowledge
    and overall comprehension.

    In Indonesia, innovative use of technology is being explored for expanding
    access to Indonesian Sign Language interpretation: there is collaboration
    between the Faculty of Engineering and Informatics, National University of
    Education, Denpasar, and the Faculty of Engineering, Universitas Kristen
    Maranatha (Maranatha Christian University), Bandung, to design and build a
    Sign Language Interpreter Device with Voice Output for use by Deaf adults
    who can understand writing and understand the Indonesian Sign Language
    used in Denpasar.134

    133 See WFD-WASLI Joint Statement on Access to Health Services and Interpreter Occupational Health:
    https://wasli.org/cat_news/wfd-wasli-joint-statement-on-covid-19.

    134 I Wayan Sukadana, I Nengah Agus Mulia Adnyana and Erwani Merry Sartika (2021). Indonesian Sign Language
    Interpreter Device Based on ATMega328 Microcontroller for Bali Deaf Community Denpasar. DOI: https://doi.
    org/10.28932/jice.v1i2.3548, Journal of Innovation and Community Engagement, Vol.1, No.2 (2021), Faculty of
    Engineering, Universitas Kristen Maranatha, Bandung, Indonesia.
    https://journal.maranatha.edu/index.php/ice/article/view/3548.
                                                                                                                                                                        91

Box 11. Telephone relay service / remote interpreting service,
Thailand

The Thai Telecommunication Relay Service (TTRS)135 was launched in 2011, to enable Deaf and speech
impaired individuals to make and receive relayed phone calls. The TTRS also allows Deaf persons to
place calls to emergency services. As well as the telephone relay service, TTRS provides remote
video sign language interpreting for situations in which Deaf persons and hearing persons who are
in the same place need to communicate with one another without an interpreter onsite. Thirty-nine
operators who are fluent in Thai spoken language and Thai Sign Language are employed to interpret
or relay these conversations. Their photographs and names are published on the website.

TTRS offers 10 services to meet diverse user needs. The services are available on internet-connected
computers, smart phones and public terminals.136 The main users are people with hearing or speech
impairment. There is no registration or call charges and the total number of calls made in 2020 was
282,551, rising to 310,962 in 2021 (as of 19 November).

                                                                                     Photo: Thai Telecommunication Relay Service (TTRS) website
                                                                                                                                            Photo source: TTRS

Photo of the front page of the TTRS website (as of 15 November 2021). The logos of the services
offered are shown from left to right on the t-shirts: TTRS SMS, TTRS Message, TTRS Live Chat, TTRS
Live Chat (Web), TTRS Video (Web), TTRS Video, TTRS KIOSK, Voice-enhanced Communication Relay
Service, TTRS Caption.

TTRS was set up under the Office of the National Broadcasting and Telecommunications Commission
(NBTC) with the following main objectives, to:
1. Guarantee equal telecommunication access for people with hearing or speech impaired by

     providing continuous services;
2. Provide people with impaired hearing or speech more channels to communicate with others in

     society through the use of technology;
3. Enable hearing or speech-impaired groups to access public and private services independently

     and efficiently.

To achieve the above objectives, the Office of the NBTC, the Universal Foundation for Persons
with Disabilities and the National Science and Technology Development Agency (NSTDA) work
together to manage the TTRS. In addition to government officials, the Steering Committee includes
representatives from disability organizations, including representatives of the Thai Association of the
Deaf and the Thai Association of Sign Language Interpreters.

135 https://www.ttrs.or.th/
136 There are 180 `KIOSKs' throughout Thailand whose locations are listed on the TTRS website.
92                                                                                     SIGN LANGUAGE

    Q7. IS SIGN LANGUAGE
    INTERPRETING UNNECESSARY
    WHEN THERE IS CAPTIONING?

    Many Deaf communities express a preference for sign language interpretation
    rather than subtitles or captions on television programmes, especially news
    programmes since the literacy level required for reading captions is a barrier
    for many Deaf persons. Information presented in sign language may be
    more immediately understood. There are also Deaf persons who prefer to
    concurrently use both sign language interpretation and captioning, especially
    in training situations when new concepts and explanations have to be grasped
    that might be unfamiliar for the sign language interpreters and the Deaf
    persons.

    Under "Goal 3 Enhance access to the physical environment, public
    transportation, knowledge, information and communication" of the Incheon
    Strategy adopted in 2012:

    "Target 3.C Enhance the accessibility and usability of information and
    communications services"
    Indicator 3.3: Proportion of daily captioning and sign language
    interpretation of public television news programmes;"

    In follow up to the Incheon Strategy, ESCAP issued in 2019 "Disability at a
    Glance 2019 Investing in Accessibility in Asia and the Pacific."137 With regard
    to Indicator 3.3:

    "A notable finding identified        Photo source: ESCAP, Disability at a
    from the progress reported on                                    Glance (2019).
    Indicator 3.3 on accessible news
    programming is that captioning
    accounts for 82 per cent of total
    accessible news time, while sign
    language interpretation is used
    less frequently (see Figure 5.E).
    This could be due to a false
    perception that provision of real-
    time captioning is sufficient with
    regard to accessibility provisions,
    particularly as sign language
    interpretation is costlier. In
    fact, for both rights-based and
    practical reasons, it is important
    for broadcasting companies and
    other relevant entities to provide
    both of these services."

    137 United Nations ESCAP (2019), p.44:
    https://www.unescap.org/sites/default/d8files/knowledge-products/SDD-DAG-2019.pdf
WHAT IS IT?                                                                                                      93

The rights-based reasons for providing interpreting are that Deaf persons
have the right to receive mass media services in subtitles or captions or in
sign language, as stated in the CRPD. Written text in captioning is not equally
accessible by all Deaf individuals, as literacy outcomes for Deaf populations
tend to be below the general average, due to barriers in education.

Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, Article 21,
Freedom of expression and opinion, and access to information

        21.d Encouraging the mass media, including providers of information
        through the Internet, to make their services accessible to persons with
        disabilities;

A good practice example of an accessible national news programme is "Sign
Language News" provided by NHK, Nippon Hoso Kyokai (Japan Broadcasting
Corporation). In this programme, Deaf hosts present news summaries in JSL
and Japanese subtitles are added. In addition, the video clips are uploaded
to the Internet and can be viewed for five days after they were originally aired.138

                Photo: Still image from the video clip on NHK's Sign Language News website
                                                                                      (as of 26 November 2021)

                                                                                   Photo source: NHK website.

There are also examples elsewhere of Deaf initiatives to broadcast news
programmes in sign language online.139

During the COVID-19 pandemic, many Governments at central, State/
provincial and local levels have assigned sign language interpretation to press
conferences. It is a good practice to have both a sign language interpreter
and captioning when special announcements and press conferences are
broadcast on television and posted online. National Deaf organizations or
Deaf organizations focusing on media matters have played an important role
in recording and disseminating signed translations of public health information
to keep Deaf communities informed.

138 https://www.nhk.or.jp/shuwa/
139 For examples, The Daily Moth in the United States:
https://www.youtube.com/c/TheDailyMoth/featured, and SeeFlow in NZ - a Deaf business that provides translations
of public information:
https://www.seeflow.co.nz/
94

       Box 12. Training legal practitioners for Chinese Standard Sign
       Language proficiency, China

          China has nearly 20 million people who are deaf and hard-of-hearing. Around 80 to 90 per cent of
          Deaf persons and Hard-of Hearing persons in China are estimated to be literate.140 There is growing
          popularity of speech-to-text and text-to-speech technology with a high standard of accuracy, and
          use of hearing aids and cochlear implants. Nevertheless, Chinese Standard Sign Language remains
          an important means of communication within the Deaf community, as also with this community.

          There is a shortage of lawyers who have a working knowledge of Chinese Standard Sign Language
          and can use it to communicate effectively with Deaf persons. In addition to the need for Chinese
          Standard Sign Language communication in the criminal justice system, there is increasing
          recognition that Deaf persons also need real-time captioning in court which facilitates transparency
          and enables Deaf persons to check the accuracy of the interpretation. There is a precedent of a
          request for such a service in court being met. Technological advancement notwithstanding, the
          lack of Chinese Standard Sign Language proficiency could affect fairness in law enforcement and
          the judicial system.141

          Cui Jing, the founder of ProSigner, an organization that provides legal assistance to Deaf persons,
          has suggested that: (a) courthouses provide two interpreters per case to ensure accuracy, and to
          provide real-time subtitles so that suspects can follow the discussions; (b) lawyers pay more attention
          to Deaf persons' facial expressions to check whether they have understood the interpreters.142 An
          example of legal sign language interpretation service to help increase the accessibility of public
          services is that provided, through government procurement of services, by the Disabled Persons'
          Federation of Beijing. The 2,000-hour legal Chinese Standard Sign Language interpretation service
          includes consultation, arbitration and litigation to empower persons with hearing disabilities to
          remove obstacles in defending their rights and, generally, safeguarding their interests.143

          At the same time, Deaf persons, with low levels of legal literacy are extremely vulnerable and face
          many challenges in accessing justice.

          "In court, the most respected role is that of the Chinese Standard Sign Language interpreter
          whose words decide thedefendant's innocence or crime and punishment, sometimes even life or
          death." Tang Shuai

          In this climate, in January 2020, the Administrative Law School, Southwest University of Political
          Science and Law, a national public university in Chongqing, China, launched an experimental
          programme to train outstanding legal practitioners for the public sector who would also be
          proficient in Chinese Standard Sign Language. The programme aims to enable its students to
          become legal practitioners who have clarity on the rights protection of groups with special needs,
          so that they can provide legal services to Deaf persons and effectively protect their rights.

                140 Source: China Association of the Deaf via the China Disabled Persons' Federation, 11 July 2022.
                141 UNDP (2016). Equal Access to Justice for Persons with Disabilities in China.
                https://www.undp.org/china/publications/equal-access-justice-persons-disabilities-china
                142 Wang Lianzhang (2018). "China's Only Sign Language Lawyer," Sixth Tone, 15 November 2018.
                https://www.sixthtone.com/news/1003204/chinas-only-sign-language-lawyer
                143 UNDP (2016). Ibid..
                                                                                                                               95

Selection of candidates

Within two weeks of enrollment in September, the University invites first-year students to sign up
for the programme on a voluntary basis. Applicants are screened via a written test and an interview.
The written test probes the students' overall abilities, such as problem-solving and writing skills. The
interview seeks to gauge the students' levels of maturity, emotional stability and social skills, career
aspirations, and knowledge about disability issues.

Each year about 30 to 50 candidates would be selected. Thus far, the programme has trained two
batches: Class 2020 and Class 2021.

Curriculum and sign language training

                                                                                In addition to the undergraduate curriculum,
                                                                                the programme offers courses in Everyday
                                                                                Chinese Standard Sign Language (taught
                                                                                by special education school teachers)
                                                                                and Chinese Standard Sign Language
                                                                                for Law (taught by front-line lawyers who
                                                                                are proficient in Chinese Standard Sign
                                                                                Language). It focuses on enabling students
                                                                                to express legal terms in Chinese Standard
                                                                                Sign Language. The course is offered in the
                                                                                second year and awards 32 credit hours.

  Photo: Tang Shuai, China's first lawyer who is proficient in Chinese          The programme focuses on Chinese Standard
     Sign Language, teaches Criminal Procedure Law, using Chinese               Sign Language training and organizes flexible
            Standard Sign Language, in the experimental programme,              learning activities, to teach students how to
                                                                                effectively communicate with Deaf persons
Administrative Law School, Southwest University of Political Science            and Hard-of-Hearing persons:
                                                     and Law, Chongqing, China

   Photo source: Administrative Law School, Southwest University of
                               Political Science and Law, Chongqing, China

First, the Chongqing Disabled Persons' Federation and Chongqing Spoken and Written Languages
Committee jointly launched a five-day Chinese Standard Sign Language training workshop at the
University in September 2021.

                                                                Photo: Law students learning Chinese Standard Sign Language
Photo source: Administrative Law School, Southwest University of Political Science and Law, Chongqing, China
96

          Second, the programme provides a channel for the students to learn from judges, prosecutors
          and lawyers. For example, the students visited Cijian Village in Shapingba District, Chongqing,
          to interview police officer He Qiao, an exemplary community-based police officer. He Qiao had
          taught herself Chinese Sign Language in order to better understand and serve the community,
          including its Deaf residents. She tried her best to help persons with disabilities find jobs and solve
          problems, thereby gaining their trust. To better serve Deaf persons, she set up the Qiaojie Services
          Office for Deaf Persons.

                             Photo: Students of the experimental programme interview community-based Police Officer He Qiao
                                   who taught herself Chinese Standard Sign Language to serve Deaf community members better
                                        Photo source: Administrative Law School, Southwest University of Political Science and Law,
                                                                                                                                           Chongqing, China

          Third, the programme provides the students with opportunities for direct contact with Deaf
          persons, to understand their needs in relation to legal services, practicing the principle of "Nothing
          about Us without Us." With relatively few persons with disabilities on campus, students of the
          experimental programme do not have enough opportunity to have daily-life contact with persons
          with disabilities. The experimental programme focuses on facilitating, among its students, a better
          understanding of the lived experiences of, and a stronger sense of connection with, persons with
          disabilities, especially Deaf persons,
          For example, in May 2021, the programme participants visited the Chongqing School for Persons
          with Hearing and Speech Impairments. The visitors explained to the students, in Chinese Standard
          Sign Language, The Law on the Protection of Persons with Disabilities, and played games with them.
          Those activities were opportunities for building friendship between the University students and the
          Deaf students. They also shared legal knowledge with the Deaf students. The University students
          benefited from the opportunity to practise communication with Deaf youth in Chinese Standard
          Sign Language, including in their chosen professional field. This is considered a preliminary step
          for the programme participants towards providing legal aid and services to the Deaf community.

                             Photo: Students of the experimental programme, Administrative Law School, Southwest University of Political
                               Science and Law, Chongqing, China, are signing legal knowledge at the Chongqing School for Persons with
                                                                                                                                   Hearing and Speech Impairments

                            Photo source: Administrative Law School, Southwest University of Political Science and Law, Chongqing, China
                                                                                                                                   97

    Photo: Students on duty at the public legal aid service station.             Fourth, the programme provides opportunities
 Photo credit: Administrative Law School, Southwest University of                for the students to practise classroom learning,
                                                                                 help fill legal aid-related public service gaps,
                                                      Political Science and Law  and explore ways of mutual empowerment
Photo source: Administrative Law School, Southwest University of                 of themselves and their clients. It set up the
                                                                                 WeChat account "Sound of Law" and the
                            Political Science and Law, Chongqing, China          "Sound of Law" Public Legal Service Station:
                                                                                 via these platforms, the students communicate
                                                                                 with and serve the deaf community. The
                                                                                 students take turns to work at the public legal
                                                                                 service station which is open six hours weekly:
                                                                                 every Tuesday and Thursday, 14:00 to 17:00
                                                                                 hours. Through offline and online approaches,
                                                                                 the station aims to provide, in a convenient
                                                                                 and efficient manner, legal consulting services
                                                                                 for Deaf persons, low-income groups, migrant
                                                                                 workers, senior citizens, minors, and other
                                                                                 groups with special needs.

Tang Shuai (he/him) was born in Chongqing, China, to Deaf parents with no formal education who
were employed in a welfare factory. In 1992, Tang Shuai started learning Chinese Sign Language
systematically, including Chinese Standard Sign Language and some of its dialect variations.

In early 2006, Tang Shuai qualified as a certified Chinese Sign Language interpreter. While working
as a Chinese Sign Language interpreter for the police, he observed issues arising from the lack of
professional Chinese Standard Sign Language interpretation services for Deaf persons in the criminal
justice system which undermined Deaf persons' access to justice in diverse ways.

In 2012, after completing a four-year undergraduate law programme at the Southwest University of
Political Science and Law, Chongqing, China, Tang Shuai passed the judicial examination and became
a full-time lawyer, providing legal services to Deaf persons.

                                                                                 In 2016, he established the WeChat account
                                                                                 "Bangzhong Legal Services" that imparts
                                                                                 to Deaf and Hard-of-Hearing persons legal
                                                                                 knowledge and explains cases via videos in
                                                                                 Chinese Standard Sign Language. The WeChat
                                                                                 account is still in operation.

   Photo:  Lawyer Tang Shuai attending a meeting with the China                  Every year since 2017, Tang Shuai offers in his
                                               Disabled Persons' Federation      law firm five internship positions to Deaf and
                                                                                 Hard-of-Hearing students. Since 2020, the
Photo source:Administrative Law School, Southwest University of                  Southwest University of Political Science and
                           Political Science and Law, Chongqing, China           Law, Chongqing, China, has engaged Tang
                                                                                 Shuai to teach its pioneer course on Chinese
                                                                                 Standard Sign Language for Law.
98

    Tan Ting (she/her), China's first Deaf lawyer

    Tan Ting was born in Liangshan Yi                             Photo: Tan Ting (she/her), the first women Deaf lawyer
    Autonomous Prefecture, Sichuan, and            Photo source: Administrative Law School, Southwest University of
    home to the largest Yi ethnic minority
    population in China. Tan Ting's childhood                                  Political Science and Law, Chongqing, China
    home was in a small village near Daliang
    Mountain. Due to a medical incident
    at the age of eight, Tan Ting lost her
    hearing and dropped out of school
    for five years.144 When she resumed
    her education in a special school,
    she jumped two grades, completing
    special education at Chongqing Normal
    University. In April 2017, when Tang Shuai
    visited Chongqing Normal University
    to meet candidates for launching an
    internship programme in his law firm,
    he recruited Ms Tan Ting to join the
    first group of five interns. In 2020, Tan
    Ting became the first Deaf person and
    woman to pass the judicial examination
    in China.

    The Southwest University of Political Science and Law, Chongqing, China, engages Tan Ting to
    teach students participating in its experimental programme. Tan Ting gives students valuable
    insights into her lived experiences: the challenges that she has encountered as a Deaf woman
    lawyer in representing Deaf clients and providing legal services for Deaf clients and how she has
    handled their cases.

    144 iFLYTEK (2021). China's First Deaf Lawyer and Her "Running Life," 17 May 2021. https://www.iflytek.com/en/news/161.html
100  SIGN LANGUAGE
WHAT IS IT?  CHAPTER101

             07
            LEGAL
RECOGNITION

         OF SIGN
    LANGUAGE

Q1. Why is it important for national governments to legally 
      recognize sign languages?

Q2. What has the Committee on the Rights of Persons with 
      Disabilities recommended to governments regarding
      sign language in Asia-Pacific?

Q3. How does disability in the SDGs support Deaf persons' rights?

Q4. What are key elements of legislative provisions to promote 
      sign language?

Q5. What are examples of legislation that promotes sign language
      in Asia-Pacific?

Q6. What other government approaches exist regarding
      sign language?
102  SIGN LANGUAGE

     Q1.WHY IS IT IMPORTANT FOR
     NATIONAL GOVERNMENTS
     TO LEGALLY RECOGNIZE SIGN
     LANGUAGES?

     To fully realize the human rights of Deaf citizens, it is necessary for national and
     local governments to legally recognize that sign languages have equal status
     to spoken languages. Therefore, it is important that language(s) identified
     in national legislation include not only spoken languages, but also sign
     languages of the respective countries. In this publication, legal recognition of
     sign language means that, in an article, clause, sub-clause or other provision of
     a law, there is an explicit statement that sign language is a language.

     Since the 1980s, social and legal recognition of sign language users has
     advanced through campaigns focusing on disability rights and accessibility. At
     the global level, there were two unifying initiatives, namely, the United Nations
     Year of Disabled Persons (1981) and the United Nations Decade of Disabled
     Persons (1983-1992). The world's first regional decade of disabled persons that
     followed right after the United Nations Decade of Disabled Persons was the
     Asian and Pacific Decade initiative. The third in the regional decade series is
     the Asian and Pacific Decade of Persons with Disabilities, 2013-2022.

     The Asian and Pacific Decade initiative complements and follows up on the
     Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities which entered into force
     on 3 May 2008. The Convention specifies that States parties are responsible
     for enabling Deaf persons to acquire and use sign language in society, and to
     maintain Deaf culture.

     International and national Deaf organizations have also lobbied persistently
     to strengthen social participation through national sign language laws. The
     peak international organization of Deaf communities in the world, the World
     Federation for the Deaf, "considers the lack of meaningful sign language
     legislation on the national level a grave violation of deaf peoples' fundamental
     rights."145

     The Japanese Federation of the Deaf, an example of a national association of
     Deaf persons, advocates for sign language rights as follows:146

             The right to acquire a sign language;
             The right to learn in a sign language;
             The right to study a sign language;
             The right to use a sign language;
             The right to protect the sign language.

     145 https://wfdeaf.org/news/the-legal-recognition-of-national-sign-languages/
     146 https://www.jfd.or.jp/en/2020/03/13/pid1818
WHAT IS IT?                                                                                                      103

The thrust of national sign language laws differs147. A common thrust area, for
example, is to uphold and protect the rights listed below.

The right to acquire a sign language

­ Following diagnosis of deafness in children, medical institutions, in
     collaboration with deaf education institutions, should provide parents
     with information about the acquisition of the respective National/Local
     Sign Languages for the concerned community and area, along with
     information about cochlear implants.

­ Education systems should provide environments in which deaf infants
     and children can acquire their National/Local Sign Languages, with
     support for their parents/guardians and other family members to learn
     the same National/Local Sign Languages, as "early exposure to sign
     language and multilingualism, combined with strong family support for
     sign languages, best prepares deaf children for their future effective
     participation in society."148

                                                          Figure 7.1
                                        The right to acquire a sign language

The right to learn in a sign language
­ There is a requirement for teachers and other education personnel

     working with Deaf students to be fluent in sign language, and to provide
     educational environments in which Deaf students can learn curriculum
     subjects through sign language.

                                                            Figure 7.2
                                           The right to learn in a sign language

147 See: De Meulder, M. (2015). The Legal Recognition of Sign Languages. Sign Language Studies, 15(4), 498­506.
doi: 10.1353/sls.2015.0018.
148 Key Points in WFD Position Paper on the Language Rights of Deaf Children, Ibid..
104                                    SIGN LANGUAGE

     The right to study a sign language

     ­ Develop a curriculum through which Deaf and hearing students can
          learn the National/Local Sign Languages, in parallel with the study of the
          national/local spoken languages in schools.

                                                          Figure 7.3
                                          The right to study a sign language

     The right to use a sign language

     ­ National/Local Sign Language interpreting and translation services
          should be provided to enable Deaf persons who use sign language to
          access and participate in all aspects of society.

                    Figure 7.4
     The right to use a sign language
WHAT IS IT?                                                                       105

The right to protect a sign language

­ Planning and resources are required to properly support linguistic
     description and documentation of sign languages and their use by Deaf
     communities.

                                                    Figure 7.5
                                  The right to protect a sign language

To be effective, sign language legislation must reflect meaningful consultations
with those who will benefit from the law and those whose duty it is to implement
it. Hence, the consultations will have to engage Deaf communities and those
whose work impacts on the effective engagement and the well-being of Deaf
persons. Adequate budgetary allocations and monitoring mechanisms would
be needed, to support its practical implementation.
106  SIGN LANGUAGE

     Q2. WHAT HAS THE COMMITTEE
     ON THE RIGHTS OF PERSONS WITH
     DISABILITIES RECOMMENDED TO
     GOVERNMENTS REGARDING SIGN
     LANGUAGE IN ASIA-PACIFIC?

     The Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities provides feedback to
     States parties (Governments that have already ratified the Convention) via two
     types of documentation. One is the document on Concluding observations to a
     specific State party responding to that country's report on the implementation
     of the Convention. The other is General comments by the Committee on the
     Rights of Persons with Disabilities on specific themes; thus far eight have been
     issued.149 Both types of documentation provide guidance to Governments on
     the strengthening of policy and action regarding Deaf persons' access to sign
     language.

     Major concerns expressed by these reports regarding sign languages pertain
     to the lack of:
     1. Legal recognition of sign language;
     2. Provision of sign languages interpretation in all aspects of the lives of

          persons who need such services;
     3. Provision of education in sign languages;
     4. Official recognition of the sign language of ethnic minorities in a given

          state.

     The recommendations of the Committee on the Rights of Persons
     with Disabilities on sign languages concern the following:

     1. Recognition of sign languages by law and support for Deaf culture.
     2. Ensuring provision of sign languages in the education of Deaf persons.
     3. Ensuring provision of sign language interpretation in health care,

          entertainment and culture, court rooms and police stations, on TV, as also
          on information related to recruiting processes and the workplace, and
          social protection.
     4. Implementation of measures to increase the number of qualified or
          certified sign language interpreters, including through the allocation of
          public resources to provide training and development of sign language
          interpreters.
     5. Translation of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
          into National/Local Sign Languages.

     149 The Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities has issued seven General comments: No. 1 on equal
     recognition before the law; No. 2 on accessibility; No. 5 on inclusive education; No. 6 on equality and non-discrim-
     ination; No. 7 on the participation of persons with disabilities, including children with disabilities, through their
     representative organizations; and No. 8 on the right of persons with disabilities to work and employment.
WHAT IS IT?                                                                   107

Parallel reports by civil society organizations support the above
points; in addition, they also highlight specific issues that include
the following:

1. False charges against Deaf persons owing to the fact that:

     1.1. No sign language interpretation was provided;

     1.2. The Deaf persons did not understand spoken language-based
          communication;

     1.3. The Deaf persons' language and communication vulnerabilities
          were ignored or exploited and no sign language interpretation was
          provided.

2. The need for the professionalization of sign language interpreting
    training and services.

3. The insufficient provision or non-provision of sign language interpreting
    in situations of risk, such as, emergencies, as well as of need, for
    example, including emergency preparedness, parliamentary sessions,
    election campaigns and related broadcast programmes, and breaking
    news on television.

4. Use of sign languages in schools is not mandated.

5. Sign language interpretation and other costs for filing lawsuits are
    borne by Deaf persons. Thus, many Deaf persons feel inhibited from
    filing lawsuits, even when they might be justified in doing so.
108  SIGN LANGUAGE

     Q3.HOW DOES DISABILITY IN THE
     SDGs SUPPORT DEAF PERSONS'
     RIGHTS?

     There are 23 explicit references to disability or persons with disabilities in the
     SDGs ensuring their inclusion in a range of development sectors. As persons
     with disabilities, by definition, include persons with all types of impairment,
     Deaf persons are among them. Thus, the abovementioned 23 references
     pertain to Deaf persons.

     It is important, practical and effective to promote the use of sign languages for
     the following three key reasons:

     1. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, including the Sustainable
          Development Goals (SDGs), constitute the leading development agenda of
          the United Nations Member States, along with a wider group of stakeholders.
          Unlike the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, which is
          a human rights treaty that requires government ratification to implement,
          the SDGs do not require prior government ratification for implementation.
          Therefore, all governments are stakeholders. In addition, the private sector,
          civil society organizations, academic institutions are encouraged to join in
          implementing the SDGs. Therefore, the promotion of sign languages in
          the framework of the SDGs can potentially involve a wider stakeholder
          base.

     2. The SDGs, unlike the predecessor Millennium Development Goals, are
          to a certain extent disability-inclusive. The SDGs constitute 17 Goals, 169
          corresponding targets and 231 indicators. While the SDGs per se do not
          specify disability, in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, as
          well as the related targets and indicators, there are 23 direct references to
          persons with disabilities/disability and one to language that is relevant for
          this Guide (as highlighted in the table below).
SIGN LANGUAGE                                                                                                                                   109

Table7.1 Disability references in the SDGs

Title of location of  Location of reference Actual reference

reference in the SDGs in the SDGs

Declaration150        The new Agenda          19. We reaffirm the importance of the Universal
                                              Declaration of Human Rights, as well as other
                      (Universal Declaration  international instruments relating to human
                      of Human Rights,        rights and international law. We emphasize
                      paragraph 19)           the responsibilities of all States, in conformity
                                              with the Charter of the United Nations, to
                                              respect, protect and promote human rights and
                                              fundamental freedoms for all, without distinction
                                              of any kind as to race, colour, sex, language,
                                              religion, political or other opinion, national or
                                              social origin, property, birth, disability or other
                                              status.

Declaration           The new Agenda          23. People who are vulnerable must be
                                              empowered. Those whose needs are reflected in
                      (People who are         the Agenda include all children, youth, persons
                      vulnerable,             with disabilities (of whom more than 80 per cent
                      paragraph 23)           live in poverty), people living with HIV/AIDS,
                                              older persons, indigenous peoples, refugees
                                              and internally displaced persons and migrants.
                                              We resolve to take further effective measures
                                              and actions, in conformity with international law,
                                              to remove obstacles and constraints, strengthen
                                              support and meet the special needs of people
                                              living in areas affected by complex humanitarian
                                              emergencies and in areas affected by terrorism.

Declaration           The new Agenda          25. We commit to providing inclusive and

                                              equitable quality education at all levels ­ early

                      (Inclusive and equitable childhood, primary, secondary, tertiary, technical

                      quality education,      and vocational training. All people, irrespective

                      paragraph 25)           of sex, age, race or ethnicity, and persons with

                                              disabilities, migrants, indigenous peoples,

                                              children and youth, especially those in vulnerable

                                              situations, should have access to life-long

                                              learning opportunities that help them to acquire

                                              the knowledge and skills needed to exploit

                                              opportunities and to participate fully in society.

                                              We will strive to provide children and youth with

                                              a nurturing environment for the full realization of

                                              their rights and capabilities, helping our countries

                                              to reap the demographic dividend, including

                                              through safe schools and cohesive communities

                                              and families.

150 Resolution 70/1 adopted by the General Assembly on 25 September 2015. Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
https://www.un.org/ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=A/RES/70/1&Lang=E
110                                                   SIGN LANGUAGE

     Title of location of    Location of reference    Actual reference
     reference in the SDGs   in the SDGs
                                                      1.3 Implement nationally appropriate social
     Goal 1.                 Target 1.3               protection systems and measures for all, including
     End poverty in all its                           floors, and by 2030 achieve substantial coverage
     forms everywhere                                 of the poor and the vulnerable.

                             Revised list of          Sustainable Development Goal indicators should
                             global Sustainable       be disaggregated, where relevant, by income, sex,
                             Development Goal         age, race, ethnicity, migratory status, disability
                             indicators (March 2017)  and geographic location, or other characteristics,
                                                      in accordance with the Fundamental Principles of
                                                      Official Statistics.151

                             Indicator 1.3.1          1.3.1 Proportion of population covered by social
                                                      protection floors/systems, by sex, distinguishing
     Goal 4.                 Target 4.5               children, unemployed persons, older persons,
     Ensure inclusive and                             persons with disabilities, pregnant women,
     equitable quality                                newborns, work-injury victims and the poor and
     education and promote                            the vulnerable.
     lifelong learning
     opportunities for all                            4.5 By 2030, eliminate gender disparities in
                                                      education and ensure equal access to all levels
                                                      of education and vocational training for the
                                                      vulnerable, including persons with disabilities,
                                                      indigenous peoples and children in vulnerable
                                                      situations.

                             Revised list of          4.5.1 Parity indices (female/male, rural/urban,
                             global Sustainable       bottom/top wealth quintile, and others such
                             Development Goal         as disability status, indigenous peoples and
                             indicators (March        conflict-affected, as data become available) for
                             2017)152,                all education indicators on this list that can be
                             Indicator 4.5.1          disaggregated.

                             Target 4.a               4.a Build and upgrade education facilities that
                                                      are child, disability and gender sensitive and
                                                      provide safe, non-violent, inclusive and effective
                                                      learning environments for all.

                                                      4.a.1 Proportion of schools with access to: (a)
                                                      electricity; (b) the Internet for pedagogical
                                                      purposes; (c) computers for pedagogical
                                                      purposes; (d) adapted infrastructure and
                                                      materials for students with disabilities; (e) basic
                                                      drinking water; (f) single sex basic sanitation.

     151 Resolution 68/261 adopted by the General Assembly on 29 January 2014. Fundamental Principles of Official Statistics.

     152 Report of the Inter-Agency and Expert Group on Sustainable Development Goal Indicators, March 2017 (E/CN.3/2017/2), Annex III.
     Revised list of global Sustainable Development Goal indicators.
     https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/indicators/official%20revised%20list%20of%20global%20sdg%20indicators.pdf
         SIGN LANGUAGE                                                                                    111

Title of location of    Location of reference Actual reference
reference in the SDGs   in the SDGs

                        Revised list of           facilities; and g) basic drinking water; f) single
                        global Sustainable        sex basic sanitation facilities; and g) basis
                        Development Goal          handwashing facilities (as per the WASH indicator
                        indicators (March 2017),  definitions).
                        Indicator 4.a.1153

Goal 8.                 Target 8.5                8.5 By 2030, achieve full and productive

Promote sustained,                                employment and decent work for all women and

inclusive, and                                    men, including for young people and persons

sustainable economic                              with disabilities, and equal pay for work of equal

growth, full and                                  value.

productive employment

and decent work for all Revised list of           8.5.1 Average hourly earnings of female and

                        global Sustainable        male employees, by occupation, age and persons

                        Development Goal          with disabilities.

                        indicators (March 2017),

                        Indicator 8.5.1

Goal 10.                Indicator 8.5.2           8.5.2 Unemployment rate, by sex, age and
Reduce inequality       Target 10.2               persons with disabilities.
within and among
countries                                         10.2 By 2030, empower and promote the
                                                  social, economic and political inclusion of all,
                                                  irrespective of age, sex, disability, race, ethnicity,
                                                  origin, religion or economic or other status.

                        Revised list of           10.2.1 Proportion of people living below 50 per

                        global Sustainable        cent of median income, by sex, age, and persons

                        Development Goal          with disabilities.

                        indicators (March 2017),

                        Indicator 10.2.1

Goal 11.                Target 11.2               11.2 By 2030, provide access to safe, affordable,
Make cities and human                             accessible and sustainable transport systems for
settlements inclusive,                            all, improving road safety, notably by expanding
safe, resilient and                               public transport, with special attention to the
sustainable                                       needs of those in vulnerable situations, women,
                                                  children, persons with disabilities and older
                                                  persons.

153 United Nations Dag Hammarskjöld Library. Sustainable Development Goals Taxonomy.
http://metadata.un.org/sdg/C040a01?lang=en
112                                                                     SIGN LANGUAGE

     Title of location of       Location of reference Actual reference
     reference in the SDGs      in the SDGs

                                Revised list of           11.2.1 Proportion of population that has

                                global Sustainable        convenient access to public transport, by sex,

                                Development Goal          age, and persons with disabilities.

                                indicators (March 2017),

                                Indicator 11.2.1

                                Target 11.7               11.7 By 2030, provide universal access to safe,
                                                          inclusive and accessible, green and public
                                                          spaces, in particular for women and children,
                                                          older persons and persons with disabilities.

                                Revised list of           11.7.1 Average share of the built-up area of

                                global Sustainable        cities that is open space for public use for all, by

                                Development Goal          sex, age, and persons with disabilities.

                                indicators (March 2017),

                                Indicator 11.7.1

                                Indicator 11.7.2          11.7.2 Proportion of persons victim of physical
                                                          or sexual harassment, by sex, age, disability
                                                          status and place of occurrence, in the previous
                                                          12 months.

                                Indicator

     Goal 16.                   Target 16.7               16.7 Ensure responsive, inclusive, participatory
     Promote peaceful
     and inclusive societies                              and representative decision-making at all levels.
     for sustainable
     development, provide       Revised list of
     access to justice for
     all and build effective,   global Sustainable        16.7.1 Proportions of positions (by sex, age,
     accountable, and
     inclusive institutions at  Development Goal          persons with disabilities and population
     all levels
                                indicators (March 2017), groups) in public institutions (national and
     Goal 17.
     Strengthen the means       Indicator 16.7.1          local legislatures, public service, and judiciary),
     of implementation
     and revitalize the                                   compared to national distributions.
     Global Partnership
     for Sustainable            Indicator 16.7.2          16.7.2 Proportion of population who believe
     Development                                          decision making is inclusive and responsive, by
                                Systemic issues           sex, age, disability, and population group.
                                Data, monitoring and
                                accountability            17.18 By 2020, enhance capacity-building
                                Target 17.18              support to developing countries, including
                                                          for least developed countries and small island
                                                          developing States, to increase significantly the
                                                          availability of high-quality, timely and reliable
                                                          data disaggregated by income, gender, age,
                                                          race, ethnicity, migratory status, disability,
                                                          geographic location and other characteristics
                                                          relevant in national contexts.
SIGN LANGUAGE                                                                                        113

Title of location of   Location of reference Actual reference
reference in the SDGs  in the SDGs

Follow-up and review   74. Follow-up and  74. (g) They will be rigorous and based on

                       review processes at all evidence, informed by country-led evaluations

                       levels will be guided by and data which is high-quality, accessible, timely,

                       the following principles: reliable and disaggregated by income, sex, age,

                       (g)                race, ethnicity, migration status, disability and

                                          geographic location and other characteristics

                                          relevant in national contexts.

3. Organizations of persons with disabilities, including the World Federation
     of the Deaf, were one of the major stakeholders that advocated for
     disability inclusion in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
     during its drafting and in its post-adoption implementation. Therefore, it is
     an international blueprint that the Deaf community could use to advocate
     for inclusion in education, health and all other aspects of the development
     process and for equal participation in mainstream society.
114

        Box 13. Deaf woman dentist-cum advocate, Juniati Effendi
                    (she/her), Indonesia

           Juniati Effendi was born deaf and attended a boarding school for Deaf children from the
           age of four where she first learned Indonesian Sign Languages. From the age of 12, she
           attended secondary school with hearing students. This was highly exceptional, given the
           observation that very few pupils with special needs attend regular school.154

           Based on her university entrance exam results, she was accepted for enrollment in the
           dentistry course at Universitas Prof. Dr. Moestopo in Jakarta.155 Despite her having fully
           met the admission criteria that led to her being accepted in the dentistry course, the
           university was concerned about her deafness and recommended that she opt for an
           alternative course in medical administration or pharmacy. This recommendation was made
           in the full knowledge that no disqualification clause existed in Indonesian law to prevent
           a Deaf person from becoming a dentist. There was no reasonable accommodation
           either throughout her studies: no provision was made for her to have Indonesian Sign
           Language interpretation or notetaking services. She managed by using written and oral
           communication. Juniati transcended the challenges of pursuing a university degree course
           under those circumstances and qualified as a dentist.

           However, for three years after graduation, she was denied employment because of her
           deafness. In 1990, she was employed as an assistant in a dental clinic. Five years later, in
           1995, Juniati opened her own dental practice ­ in her own home in Jakarta.

           Juniati's knowledge and skills as a fully qualified dentist are as good as that of any
           similarly qualified dentist. She is proficient in Indonesian Sign Languages which she uses
           to communicate with her family. The initial challenge was how to communicate with
           hearing patients. Fortunately, most people in her neighborhood community know that
           she is Deaf, and she communicates with them by writing and/or by the oral method
           (communication by voice and lip reading, as distinct from communicating in any of the
           Indonesian Sign Languages).

           In addition to working as a general dentistry practitioner, Juniati is also active in the
           Indonesian Association for the Welfare of the Deaf (IAWD). IAWD now contracts more
           than 100 Indonesian Sign Language interpreters, a number that has grown from just one
           at the time it hosted the Asia-Pacific Deaf Congress in 2004.

           In her advocacy for systematic strengthening of Indonesian Sign Language interpretation
           in Indonesia, Juniati observed that Indonesian Sign Language interpreters who practise
           in Indonesia tend not to have official (Government) recognition. There is no law setting
           uniform standards and regulating criteria that must be met to qualify as an Indonesian
           Sign Language Interpreter.156 Juniati contributed to efforts for recognition of Indonesian
           Sign Language as integral to the identity of Deaf Indonesians, to be taught in the national
           education system.

                 154 Rima Yuwana Yustikaningrum (2020). "Social Justice for Deaf Students in Indonesia: Implementing the Right to Education by Learning
                 Sign Language for All" in The Osaka Conference on Education 2020, Official Conference Proceedings, The International Academic
                 Forum 2020, Nagoya, Aichi, Japan, pp. 27-39:
                 http://papers.iafor.org/wp-content/uploads/conference-proceedings/OCE/OCE2020_proceedings.pdf

                 155 http://moestopo.ac.id/

                 156 Juniati Effendi (2018). `Penjurubahasaan Dalam Bahasa Isyarat':
                 file:///C:/Users/Admin/Downloads/PENJURUBAHASAAN%20DALAM%20BAHASA%20ISYARAT.pdf
                                                                                                                                                 115

Further to continuous IAWD efforts to            Photo: Juniati Effendi in her dental practice.
change the deaf education system to use                             Photo source: Juniati Effendi.
sign languages, the Director of Public and
Special Education issued, on 23 September
2021, for all departments of education,
including in the provinces, a circular letter
that recognizes the need for all sign
languages in Indonesia like SIBI, Jakarta
Sign Language, Yogjakarta Sign Language,
and Bahasa Isyarat Indonesia (Bisindo)157
in other provinces to grow and develop as
communication media and also to be used
in all settings, including special schools, and
by Deaf and Hard-of-Hearing communities
and the general public. The circular letter is
a significant step for progress in changing the
education of Deaf persons.158 It was possible
due to Law No. 8/2016 on Persons with
Disabilities.159 Article 41.e of the Law No.
8/2016 mentions Bisindo.

Furthermore, on 31 December 2021, the Government of Indonesia, through its Ministry of
Manpower, published the minimum standardized national competencies for both Deaf and
hearing sign language interpreters.160 With this, the following are clearly defined:

(1) Provision of adequate education, training and experience to achieve the minimum
standardized competencies for Indonesian Sign Language interpreting.

(2) Permission for the establishment of a proper certification mechanism to ensure the
mastery of the competencies for sign language interpretation of Indonesian Sign Languages.

Spurred on by the goal of improving social justice for Deaf persons all over Indonesia, Juniati
continues to work hard through IWAD.

157 Personal communication to the ESCAP Sign Language Awareness Guide team, 18 March 2022, from Laura Lesmana Wjaya (she/her),
Guru Bahasa Isyarat Jakarta.
Bahasa Isyarat Indonesia (Bisindo) or Indonesian Sign Language is any of several related sign languages of Indonesia, at least on the island of
Java. Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Indonesian_Sign_Language

158 Personal email communication of 17 March 2022 from Laura Lesmana Wijaya, Deaf linguist and Jakarta Sign Language Teacher.

159 https://www.ilo.org/jakarta/info/public/pr/WCMS_475052/lang--en/index.htm; https://www.ilo.org/dyn/natlex/natlex4.detail?p_lang=en&p_
isn=103080&p_count=1&p_classification=08.01; https://peraturan.bpk.go.id/Home/Details/37251/uu-no-8-tahun-2016

160 https://skkni.kemnaker.go.id/tentang-skkni/dokumen.
116  SIGN LANGUAGE

     Q4. WHAT ARE KEY ELEMENTS
     OF LEGISLATIVE PROVISIONS TO
     PROMOTE SIGN LANGUAGE?

     In order for Deaf persons to exercise their human rights and enjoy all
     opportunities in society in the same way as hearing persons do, governments
     at all levels need to take the lead in translating the abstract concept of human
     rights into more concrete legal terms. While governments might implement
     programmes related to sign languages, there is value in having laws "with
     teeth" to mandate actions by diverse stakeholders and in many cases,
     budgetary allocations, for implementation and enforcement of the law.

     Furthermore, it is crucial for every State to have legal recognition of its own
     sign language as a language. Without legal recognition of sign language as a
     language, even when the use of sign language might be promoted, including
     by law, such promotion might not have the same impact as those languages
     that are legally recognized as languages in the same country.

     Let us take the example of sign language and education. If sign languages are
     recognized as languages by law, the provision of education in sign language
     for Deaf persons would be legally mandated for nationwide implementation.
     Furthermore, if sign language is recognized as a language in a country, it could
     be taught from pre-school upwards in the education system for all learners. In
     that way, many more people would be able to communicate in sign language
     and be more aware of its importance.

     The Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities recognizes sign
     language as a language like spoken language. Therefore, if a State party
     harmonizes domestic legislation with the Convention, it should reflect the
     spirit, intent and content of the Convention in its laws, including through
     recognizing sign language as a language.

     However, merely stating that sign language is a language might be only
     declaratory and does not suffice to encourage government action. Therefore,
     laws should have more detailed provisions which obligate the responsible
     parties to take action on a sustained basis.

     Against this background, below are seven key elements that would make for
     strong legislative provisions concerning sign language, with an explanation for
     each element.

     1. Recognition of sign language as a language;
     2. Identification of situations requiring upholding of the right to use sign

          language;
     3. Sign language acquisition, and using sign language for education and

          skills training;
     4. Promotion of a system for professional sign language interpretation;
WHAT IS IT?                                                                         117

5. Using technology for accessibility;
6. Research on and promotion of sign language;
7. Meaningful participation of Deaf persons in decision-making processes

     concerning sign language.

The paragraphs below elaborate on each key element.

1. Recognition of sign language as a language

As mentioned at the outset of this Chapter, legal recognition of sign language
means that in an article, a clause, sub-clause or other provision of a law, there
is an explicit statement that sign language is a language.

The World Federation of the Deaf (WFD) asserts that sign languages should
be legally recognized as "languages,"161 and according to its research, 71
governments in the world have legally recognized sign languages as languages.
Of the 71, 12 governments in Asia and the Pacific have done so.

Government respect for the spirit, intent and content of the Convention
through legal recognition of sign language per se is deemed by many as
central to upholding the rights of Deaf persons. A more progressive approach
by Governments would be to recognize sign languages as part of the "official
languages" of the State. Official language is generally defined as "the language
or one of the languages that is accepted by a country's government, is taught
in schools, used in the courts of law, etc."162 If a language is recognized as
an "official language," the legitimacy of that language in a country would be
enhanced, with stronger recognition assured.

2. Identification of situations requiring upholding of
   the right to use sign language

In accordance with the Convention, the rights of persons with disabilities have
to be realized in all dimensions of life. Its thematic articles highlight specific
situations in which those rights have to be realized and the measures that
States parties have to take in those situations.

In the same vein, the law of a country could identify specific situations in which
the right to use sign language should be realized, with measures to be taken
by the parties designated by that law. There are examples of laws in Asia-
Pacific that identify specific situations in which access to sign language has to
be ensured, such as sign language interpretation in the justice system; media;
public school system; public transportation, facilities and services; and the
healthcare system.

161 The Legal Recognition of National Sign Languages - WFD (wfdeaf.org)
162 https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/official-language
118  SIGN LANGUAGE

     3. Sign language acquisition, and using sign
        language for education and skills training

     It is essential for domestic legislation to promote sign language acquisition,
     as well as education and skills training using sign language. In that regard,
     supportive measures include the following:

            (a) Provide parents and other family members of infants and young
                children who are diagnosed as deaf with information on the benefits
                of learning sign language as early as possible and of interacting
                with the Deaf community, and not just information on medical
                intervention options, such as cochlear implants;

            (b) Subsidize educational institutions that provide a learning
                environment in which Deaf children and their families can interact
                with other Deaf children and Deaf adults in the national sign
                language;

            (c) Impart, in teacher training institutions and to all educational
                professionals, knowledge on bilingualism as the more effective
                approach to the education of Deaf children recommended by Deaf
                experts, rather than oral teaching methods;

            (d) Require that teachers and other educational personnel who work
                with Deaf students are fluent in sign language;

            (e) Require classes with Deaf students to ensure accessibility by the use
                of sign language in those classes;

            (f) Develop curricula and resources for the teaching of sign language in
                public schools.

            (g) Ensure the use of national sign language as the medium of instruction
                in institutions, enterprises and organizations delivering a range
                of educational, skills development and certification programmes,
                ranging from life skills to vocational and professional education and
                training.

     4. Promotion of a system for professional sign
        language interpretation

     For Deaf persons to be able to fully and effectively participate in society, the
     provision of professional sign language interpretation is essential. For that to
     happen, it is very important for government at all levels to ensure the availability
     of sign language interpreters by, among others, including the following in the
     law:

            (a) Provision of sign language interpretation services by public bodies
                and private companies whenever and wherever they are needed, in
                all areas of life, including education, health care, justice, employment,
                communication and multimedia, as well as in institutions and in
                political processes;

            (b) Provision of sign language interpreter training programmes in
                government-funded and community-based educational institutions;

            (c) Establishment of a coordinated training and accreditation system for
WHAT IS IT?                                                                           119

           sign language interpreters, standards and scales for fair remuneration
           of interpretation services, as well as implementation of a system for
           the regulation of professional and ethical standards in the delivery
           of interpreting services;

       (d) Mainstreaming of the responsibility for the provision of sign
           language interpreting services in all ministries and government
           entities, including but not limited to education, communication
           and multimedia, and employment, rather than confining that
           responsibility to the ministry responsible for social welfare.

5. Using technology for accessibility

For realizing the rights of Deaf persons, including the right to accessibility, mere
provision of sign language will not suffice. Other means that are protected by
law are required; those include the following:

       (a) Provide all essential and time-critical information disseminated to the
           general public in video (national/local sign language interpretation)
           and written (subtitles/captioning) formats: this responsibility is
           particularly important but is not limited to public bodies such as those
           for public health, disaster risk reduction, as well as management of
           environmental hazards, utilities, transport and food security;

       (b) Provide light and tactile signals for all audible alarm sounds in the
           built environment, including the street environment, and in the
           public transportation system;

       (c) Require telecommunication providers to:

                (i) Offer not only voice, but also text chat and video
                    telecommunication options;

                (ii) Establish a telephone relay service system;

                (iii)Contribute a percentage of earnings (for example, 1 cent per
                    subscriber) to a fund for payment of national/State/provincial/
                    prefectural/municipal/local sign language interpretation
                    services for Deaf persons;

                (iv) Establish a mechanism for the transparent receipt, as well as
                    ethical and effective management and disbursement of funds
                    for the payment of sign language interpreter services at all
                    levels;

       (d) Remove disqualification clauses in laws that exclude Deaf persons
           from obtaining professional qualifications, licenses and technical
           certification on an equal basis with others, and require the provision
           of reasonable accommodation.

6. Research on and promotion of sign language

Governments play a crucial role in promoting sign languages and related
research. Therefore, government measures, including but not limited to laws
and regulations, could cover the following:
120  SIGN LANGUAGE

            (a) Establish a national sign language planning committee composed
                of sign language users (for example representatives of the Deaf
                community with higher education, Deaf researchers, Deaf teachers
                and Deaf Sign Language interpreters), with the responsibility to
                collaborate with government on status planning, corpus planning163
                and acquisition planning for sign languages and to implement
                related language policy;

            (b) Establish a research institute or support existing entities to study the
                use of sign languages in the country and to compile dictionaries and
                corpora for future use in various fields;

            (c) Raise awareness of sign languages as languages, the right to use
                them with access to sign language interpreter services, their
                importance for Deaf persons, and their access to sign language
                interpretation in various media, especially for breaking news and
                major announcements and current affairs matters;

            (d) Raise awareness of the cultural identity of Deaf persons and of the
                diversity in the Deaf community by, among others, engaging Deaf
                persons through various media including those covering social,
                educational and cultural programmes.

     7. Meaningful participation of Deaf persons in
        decision-making processes concerning sign
        language

     In the spirit of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, Deaf
     persons' meaningful and effective participation in decision-making processes
     yields results that address long-neglected issues that undermine overall
     social progress. It is especially critical to enable Deaf persons' meaningful
     and effective participation in decision-making processes concerning sign
     language-related policies and programmes. This would entail a dramatic
     shift away from ignoring the lived realities of Deaf persons' communication
     preferences or merely consulting them on an ad hoc basis, to engaging Deaf
     persons at every step of decision making. For Deaf persons' meaningful and
     effective participation, it is necessary to enable them to use their preferred
     communication mode, as early as possible. to gain skills and experiences,
     thereby building their self-confidence at the individual and community level.

     163 Status planning, corpus planning and acquisition planning are terms used in language planning. Status planning
     refers to planning on how a language is used in public settings. For further details, please see https://www.cam-
     bridge.org/core/books/abs/language-planning-and-social-change/status-planning/BFCCCBEBC3CE6A2F69DD3B-
     8F8A909F1F. In corpus planning, planning decisions are made to engineer changes in the structure of a language.
     Corpus planning activities often arise from beliefs about the adequacy of the form of a language to serve desired
     functions. For further details, please see: https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/annual-review-of-applied-lin-
     guistics/article/abs/language-planning-corpus-planning/3BFBC258E200C3C62C0F6396CA360897. Acquisition
     planning is concerned with the range of language users and the distribution of literacy; it is multifaceted, involving a
     continuum of issues from the psychological to the societal. For further details, please refer to https://www.research-
     gate.net/publication/327052604_Acquisition_Planning;
     https://www.researchgate.net/publication/325304819_Situating_Language_Acquisition_Planning;
     https://www.researchgate.net/publication/327052604_Acquisition_Planning;
WHAT IS IT?                                                                                                   121

Q5. WHAT ARE EXAMPLES OF
LEGISLATION THAT PROMOTES
SIGN LANGUAGE IN ASIA-PACIFIC?

In the ESCAP region, the following 15 Governments have legislation that
promotes sign language:

(1) Bangladesh;
(2) China;
(3) Fiji;
(4) India;
(5) Japan;
(6) Malaysia;
(7) Marshall Islands (Republic of);
(8) Mongolia;
(9) Nepal;
(10) New Zealand;
(11) Philippines;
(12) Republic of Korea;
(13) Russian Federation;
(14) Türkiye;
(15) Uzbekistan.

Annex 1 provides a list, with hyperlinks, of the laws of the abovementioned 15
ESCAP member States.

ESCAP checked all WFD entries for Asia-Pacific in the WFD world map entitled
"The Legal Recognition of National Sign Languages."164

The legislation of ESCAP members in Asia-Pacific named on the WFD list was
reviewed to identify key elements. Anomalies and discrepancies that were
noted in the course of that review were cross-checked against the legislation
of each ESCAP member. This publication contains updates that are based on
ESCAP research and examination of the legislation of those ESCAP members.

Types of legislation

The abovementioned 15 Governments address the importance of sign
language through different types of legislation, as indicated in table 7.2:
constitution; disability law; sign language-specific law.

In this publication, "disability law" refers to a single piece of legislation that
defines a government's approach to disability; it does not pertain to standalone
sector-specific disability legislation (for example, the Act on Promotion of
Measures concerning Information Access and Use and Communications that
Japan adopted in 2022 is a sector-specific disability law).

164 Accessed on 11 September 2022: https://wfdeaf.org/news/the-legal-recognition-of-national-sign-languages/
(When ESCAP checked the WFD website, it had last been updated as of 10 January 2022.)
.
122                                                   SIGN LANGUAGE

     Twelve Governments have specific provisions on sign languages in their
     disability laws, while three Governments have sign language-specific laws.
     Table 7.2 summarizes these categories and names the 15 ESCAP member
     States.

     Table 7.2. Three types of legislation that promotes sign language

     Constitution  Disability law      Sign language-specific
                                       law
     Fiji          Bangladesh
     Nepal         China               New Zealand
                   Fiji                Philippines
                   India               Republic of Korea
                   Japan
                   Malaysia
                   Marshall Islands
                   Mongolia
                   Nepal
                   Russian Federation
                   Türkiye
                   Uzbekistan

     Constitution and disability law: Fiji and Nepal

     Fiji and Nepal are the only countries in the ESCAP region that address sign
     language in both its Constitution and in a disability law.

     As the Constitution, generally speaking, is the highest law in the legislative
     order, it is significant that Fiji has two provisions dedicated to sign language,
     while Nepal has a sub-clause on the right to "get free education through sign
     language, in accordance with the law."

     Fiji in its Constitution has a provision referring to sign languages as follows:

                   "Access to courts or tribunals

     15. --- ....

     (6) Every person charged with an offence, every party to civil proceedings,
     and every witness in criminal or civil proceedings has the right to give
     evidence and to be questioned in a language that he or she understands.

     (7) Every person charged with an offence and every party to civil
     proceedings has the right to follow the proceedings in a language that
     he or she understands.

     (8) To give effect to the rights referred to in subsections (6) and (7),
     the court or tribunal concerned must, when the interests of justice so
     require, provide, without cost to the person concerned, the services of
     an interpreter or of a person competent in sign language.
     ....
WHAT IS IT?                                                                    123

                     Rights of persons with disabilities

42.(1) A person with any disability has the right--

(a) to reasonable access to all places, public transport and information;
(b) to use sign language, Braille or other appropriate means of
communication;
and
(c) to reasonable access to necessary materials, substances and devices
relating to the person's disability."

Below are the references in which "sign language' appears in Fiji's
disability law:

"RIGHTS OF PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES ACT 201

PART 1--PRELIMINARY

2. Interpretation

In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires--
....

"language" includes spoken and sign language and other forms of non-
spoken languages;
....

    PART 6--DISCRIMINATION ON THE BASIS OF DISABILITY AND
                   RIGHTS OF PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES

....

29. Accessibility

All persons with disabilities have the following rights--
....

(b) to use sign language, Braille or other appropriate means of
communication
....

(f) to forms of assistance and intermediaries, including guides, readers
and professional sign language interpreters, to facilitate accessibility to
buildings and other facilities open to the public.
....

40. Freedom of expression and opinion, and access to information
All persons with disabilities have the right to exercise the right to freedom
of expression and opinion, including the freedom to seek, receive and
impart information and ideas on an equal basis with others and through
all forms of communication of their choice, including --
---
124  SIGN LANGUAGE

             (b) the use of sign languages, Braille, augmentative and alternative
             communication, and all other accessible means, modes and formats of
             communication of their choice in official interactions; and

             (c) the right to the use of sign language.
             ...
             43. Education

             (4) Persons with disabilities have the right to learn life and social
             development skills to facilitate their full and equal participation in
             education and as members of the community including--
             ....

             (b) the learning of sign language and the promotion of the linguistic
             identity of the deaf community;
             ....

             48. Participation in cultural life, recreation, leisure and sport
             ....

             (3) All persons with disabilities have the right on an equal basis with
             others, to recognition and support of their specific cultural and linguistic
             identity, including sign languages and deaf culture.
             ...."

     Nepal in its Constitution has a provision referring to sign language as follows:

                     Part 3-- Fundamental Rights and Duties
             ....
             31. Right relating to education: ....

             (4) The visually impaired citizens shall have the right to get free education
             through brail script and the citizens with hearing or speaking impairment,
             to get free education through sign language, in accordance with law.

     Sign language-specific law

     There are three ESCAP member States that have sign language-specific laws:
     New Zealand, Philippines and the Republic of Korea. In the ESCAP region,
     these three member States are pioneers in their recognition of sign language
     as a language. Particularly noteworthy is the role of Deaf persons and their
     representative organizations in this achievement. The story of the Korea Deaf
     Association is a case in point. Lessons from its struggle are contained in the
     story of its journey, including its vision, sense of mission, strategic advocacy,
     solidarity and persistence in the face of enormous obstacles when few believed
     it possible that Deaf Koreans could possibly have a sign language-specific law.

     Below are excerpts that show how sign language is recognized in the
     respective law.
WHAT IS IT?                                                                         125

New Zealand

        "Purpose
              i. declaring New Zealand Sign Language to be an official language
                 of New Zealand;"

The Philippines recognizes its sign language as follows:

        "Section 3. Filipino Sign Language as the National Sign Language. ­
        Filipino Sign Language, hereinafter referred to as FSL, is hereby declared
        as the national sign language of the Philippines."

Republic of Korea

        "Article 2 (Basic Idea)
        Korean sign language is the official language of the deaf of the Republic
        of Korea."

Each of these sign language-specific laws is summarized below.

Philippines

        "RA 11106 ­ An Act Declaring The Filipino Sign Language As The
        National Sign Language Of The Filipino Deaf And The Official Sign
        Language Of Government In All Transactions Involving The Deaf, And
        Mandating Its Use In Schools, Broadcast Media, And Workplaces"
Hereafter, this Act is referred to as the Philippine Act; it is composed of 18
sections.

The Act delineates the principles of non-discrimination and disability rights in
line with the Convention. It obligates the national government to recognize,
promote and support "Filipino Sign Language (FSL)"165 as the language
of instruction for deaf education, while respecting individual choice of or
preference for forms of communication. The law requests the Ministry of
Education, other education authorities and local governments to coordinate
with each other to ensure that Deaf students are educated and trained in FSL.
The unique feature of the law is its focus on the development of Deaf teachers.

Furthermore, with the participation of the Deaf community and other
stakeholders, the law requires the relevant government agencies to establish
a national system of standards, accreditation and procedures for FSL
interpreting. The sign language-specific law of the Philippines stipulates the
provision of sign language in the justice system; workplaces; health system;
public transactions, services and facilities; the media. The law also invokes
the role of multistakeholders, in consultation with representatives of the Deaf
community, in formulating and implementing rules and regulations.

Republic of Korea

The Korean Sign Language Act contains 20 articles. The unique feature of the
Act is that the Ministry of Culture, Sports and Tourism is responsible for its
implementation and not a ministry concerned with social welfare. The Act is

165 FSL: Filipino Sign Language.
126  SIGN LANGUAGE

     based on principles of non-discrimination against Deaf persons and respect
     for their cultural and linguistic identity.

     Every five years, the Minister of Culture, Sports and Tourism is responsible
     for developing and implementing a basic plan for Korean Sign Language
     Development. Each Basic Plan covers 13 action areas. Drawing from the Basic
     Plan, the Minister, heads of central administrative agencies and mayors/provincial
     governors are obliged to develop and act on annual implementation plans.

     The Government shall finalize and report to the National Assembly the basic
     plan and implementation plans, and their execution. Concerning the role of the
     State and local governments, the Act covers Korean Sign Language education,
     support for families of Deaf persons, provision of Korean Sign Language
     interpretation services, and support for the activities of "civil organizations."
                                                                                                                                                                  127

Box 14. Sign Language Act: A tale of vision, perseverance
and tenacity ~ 11 years of the Korea Deaf Association's
bottom-up and top-down advocacy campaign for the Korean
Sign Language Act

Deaf persons themselves initiated and conducted the campaign for the Korean Sign
Language (KSL) Act. The campaigners actively mobilized the Deaf community during
the entire legislative process, demonstrating that Deaf persons demanded language
rights and had a close interest in determining how their demands were reflected in the
law.

The prime mover of the campaign to achieve legal recognition of Korean Sign
Language was the Seventh President (2005-2015) of the Korea Association of the Deaf,
Seung-Il Byun, a Deaf activist with experience in human rights advocacy. A visit to
Finland in 2005 introduced Byun to legal recognition of Finish Sign Language, inspiring
him to embark on a fight for the same legal recognition of Korean Sign Language.

Furthermore, Byun, as a member of the delegation of the Republic of Korea, was
involved in the legislative process of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities and observed first-hand the law-making process. This made him realize the
importance of enshrining rights in law and hence the need for the legal recognition of
Korean Sign Language.

Mi-Hye Lee, the (hearing) Secretary-General of the Korea Association of the Deaf,
coordinated the long campaign and ensured that Byun's original aims did not get lost
during the extended campaign process. The initiators organized diverse campaign
activities, contacted Congressmen and Congresswomen and built a network to start the
legislation process. Byun and Lee stayed in office until February 2015; there was strong
leadership stability for the conduct of the campaign. In March 2015, Dae-Seob Lee was
elected as the new president of the Korea Association of the Deaf.

He continued the campaign and the KSL Act was enacted in 2016. From conceiving the
idea of Korean legislation on Korean Sign Language in 2005 until enactment in 2016,
the process took 11 years of unwavering effort.

The campaigners opted for an independent language act, despite the prospect that
it would take much longer. The decision was based on the fact that the identity, social
background and culture of Deaf KSL signers differed from that of hearing Korean
speakers, and the campaigners did not believe that a revision of the Framework Act
would consider the special needs and circumstances of KSL users.

The Association undertook massive and detailed efforts over an extended period. The
efforts included research: desk research on legislation and field research. Its survey of
priorities for people with disabilities indicated that the KSL Bill ranked very low for most
Koreans with disabilities.

The Association's initial efforts did not yield collaboration with any Congressperson:
the Association felt that there was insufficient understanding regarding the core
motivation of the proposed KSL legislation. The way out of the impasse was in valuable
advice from policymakers involved in the Anti-Discrimination Against and Remedies
for Persons with Disabilities Act, 2008, to ensure that the KSL legislation became a
128

       national task. For the KSL legislation to become a national task, it had to be included in
       the party platform of the elected president. And, for that, the Association had to deal
       with the low priority of other disability groups regarding KSL legislation. Much time and
       effort were spent on explaining to the Board, Association of Persons with Disabilities,
       the importance of KSL legislation to Korean Deaf persons. Two arguments were critical:
       deafness is an invisible communication disability which affects every area of life, limiting
       deaf people's access to information. Furthermore, deaf people use a language that
       is different from the language used by persons with other disabilities, curtailing deaf
       people's access to benefits from support services for disabled people.

       The eventual agreement of the Board of the Association of Persons with Disabilities to
       the inclusion of the KSL Bill in the Board's official request to the presidential platform
       was one of the most important milestones towards achieving the KSL legislation. The
       support of the Board for the KSL legislation enabled it to become one of 12 official
       pledges that were included by all parties participating in the presidential election.
       After President Park Geun-Hye confirmed the KSL legislation as a national task, the
       issue became a national matter and the Ministry of Culture, Sports and Tourism
       assumed charge of preparing the legislative process. The Association campaigners then
       supported the process by providing the Ministry with all materials (e.g., previous drafts,
       statistics, survey results, and literature) concerning the KSL Bill. This made it a bottom-
       up and top-down strategy.

       Key campaign highlights

       From 2008 onwards, the campaign for the legal recognition of KSL was the main
       priority of the Korean Association of the Deaf. All its branch offices in towns and
       provinces, as well as its youth, women and senior citizen groups engaged in the
       campaign.

       In September 2008, the Korea Association of the Deaf established a KSL Legislation
       Committee composed of Deaf and hearing persons and lawyers. The KSL Legislation
       Committee's main task was to prepare a draft of the legislation, based on its review of
       legislation and policies, both domestic and of other jurisdictions.

       In 2008, the Sign Language Act Adoption, Promotion and Research Committee was
       established aimed at the adoption of a law recognizing Korean Sign Language as a
       language.

       Mass rally (1 June 2012): 1,000 Deaf Koreans from all over the country participated
       in the rally. They were supported by representatives of other disabled persons who
       supported legal recognition of KSL.

       3 June 2012 launch of a 100-day one-person protest relay: each day one person would
       carry a protest poster around the neck and demonstrate in a prominent public place for
       the rights of deaf people. This was a nationwide silent protest covering different part
       of the country and conducted in relay each day by an individual in a prominent public
       venue. The locations were chosen for their political or historical significance or because
       they were crowded and popular.

       6 October 2012: about 200 Deaf young persons marched from a tourist location in the
       centre of Seoul-to-Seoul Central Station to highlight "Sign Language is a language."
                                                                                                                                                                   129

A petition campaign was launched via the Internet that requested the drafting and the
adoption of the Korean Sign Language Act.

These activities mobilized and united Deaf people, the children of Deaf adults (CODAs),
hearing KSL signers and KSL interpreters for the campaign to achieve legal recognition of
KSL and claim the language rights of Deaf persons as part of human rights, including the
right to choose the language in which one wants to communicate.

2013: The inclusion of the adoption of the Korean Sign Language Act in the Presidential
Election campaign agenda by the then Presidential candidate, Ms. Park Geun-hye, for the
2013 election was significant. A decision was made to locate the Korean Sign Language
Act with Korean language policies. The Framework Act on Korean Language had been
promulgated in January 2005.

2014 and 2015 unexpected delays: the efforts to shed light on the sinking (16 April 2014)
of the MS Sewol, which cost the lives of 304, crippled the law-making process of the
National Assembly. Five Bills, including the KSL Bill, were stuck for over a year. The Middle
East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS) outbreak (May 2015), followed by an assembly ban
and official closure of schools and institutions, further delayed the KSL Bill by another six
months.

Within the Deaf community, these campaign activities raised awareness of and mobilized
support for KSL. Deaf people, the children of Deaf adults (CODAs), hearing KSL signers
and KSL interpreters ­ all supported the campaign. Beyond the Deaf community, the
activities drew the attention of the hearing majority to the importance of legal recognition
of KSL.

The legal recognition of KSL is an important milestone on the way to equal rights for Deaf
persons in the Republic of Korea.

New Zealand

The New Zealand Sign Language Act contains 13 provisions with four specific objectives:

Declaring New Zealand Sign Language to be an official language of New Zealand;
Providing for the use of New Zealand Sign Language in legal proceedings;
Empowering the making of regulations setting competency standards for the interpretation in
legal proceedings of New Zealand Sign Language; and Stating principles to guide government
departments in the promotion and use of New Zealand Sign Language.

The uniqueness of the Act is that it contains details on upholding Deaf persons' right to
use New Zealand Sign Language (NZSL) in legal proceedings "where the person's first or
preferred language is NZSL." The Act has six subsections on who may use NZSL under
what circumstances. The Act stipulates that the government should consult with the Deaf
community organizations on matters relating to NZSL.
130  SIGN LANGUAGE

     Disability law

     The following 12 Governments have disability laws which refer to sign
     languages in various ways: Bangladesh; China; Fiji; India; Japan; Malaysia;
     Marshall Islands; Mongolia; Nepal; Russian Federation; Türkiye; Uzbekistan.

     Key elements of legislative provisions

     ESCAP reviewed the legislation of member States for reference to sign
     language, including legal recognition of sign language. Table 7.3 presents the
     laws of the 15 ESCAP member States that make a reference to the seven key
     elements.

     1. Recognizing sign language as a language

     The following 12 Governments recognize sign language as a language in
     different ways: Bangladesh; Fiji; Japan; Malaysia; Marshall Islands; Mongolia;
     Nepal; New Zealand; Philippines; Republic of Korea; Russian Federation;
     Türkiye.

     For example, Malaysia, in its disability law, recognizes "Malaysia Sign Language
     as the official sign language for the deaf in Malaysia." Nepal's disability law
     states that "'Language' means spoken or sign language and other forms of
     non-spoken languages." This is also stated in Fiji's disability law. In the case of
     the Russian Federation where many languages are spoken, legislation defines
     only Russian as the official language at the national level and Russian Sign
     Language as "language of communication in the presence of hearing and/or
     speech disorders."166

     2. Identification of situations requiring upholding of the right to
         use sign language

     The following seven Governments have identified situations in which designated
     parties are required to uphold the right of Deaf persons to use sign language
     and have access to sign language interpretation services: Bangladesh, China,
     Fiji, India, Philippines, New Zealand and Republic of Korea.

     The laws of the seven countries cover one or more of the following:

           ­ Daily communication, public and private media, and any other
                electronic media;

           ­ Legal proceedings, justice system;
           ­ Public sector work place;
           ­ Education;
           ­ Public event and administrative procedures.

     166 http://government.ru/activities/selection/525/29804/
     Based on personal communication of Yutaka Osugi with Russian expert on 13 October 2022.
WHAT IS IT?  131
132                                                    SIGN LANGUAGE

     Table 7.3. Key elements that promote sign language in the laws of 15 ESCAP
     member States (part one)

     Countries with    Recognition of Identification   Sign language
     legislation that                                  acquisition, and use
     promotes sign     sign language as of situations  of sign language for
     language                                          education and skills
                       a language  requiring           training

                                   upholding of the

                                   right to use sign

                                   language

     Bangladesh                    

     China                                             

     Fiji                          

     India                                             

     Japan             

     Malaysia                                          

     Marshall Islands                                  

     Mongolia          

     Nepal                                             

     New Zealand                   

     Philippines                                       

     Republic of                                       

     Korea

     Russian           

     Federation

     Türkiye           

     Uzbekistan

     This table shows the key elements related to sign language promotion that
     ESCAP has identified in the laws of 15 ESCAP member States.
         WHAT IS IT?                                                                          133

Table 7.3. Key elements that promote sign language in the laws of 15 ESCAP
member States (part two)

Countries with        Promotion of   Using           Promotion of           Meaningful
legislation that      a system for   technology for  sign language          participation of
promotes sign         professional   accessibility   and related            Deaf persons in
language              sign language                  research               decision-making
                      interpreting                                          processes
                                                                            concerning sign
                                                                            language

Bangladesh                           

China                                                

Fiji                                 

India                                                

Japan                 

Malaysia                             

Marshall Islands                     

Mongolia                                             

Nepal                                

New Zealand                                                                 

Philippines                                                                 

Republic of                                          

Korea

Russian                              

Federation

Türkiye               

Uzbekistan                           

This table shows the key elements related to sign language promotion that
ESCAP has identified in the laws of 15 ESCAP member States.
134  SIGN LANGUAGE

     For example, the Philippine Act contains five sections on obligations to provide
     sign language interpretation in specific situations: justice system; workplaces;
     health system; public transactions, services and facilities; media.

     "Section 6. Filipino Sign Language in the Justice System. ­ The FSL[5] shall be
     the official language and legal interpreting for the deaf in all public hearings,
     proceedings, and transactions of the courts, quasi-judicial agencies, and other
     tribunals. To ensure effective access to justice for the deaf on an equal basis with
     others and to facilitate their effective role as direct and indirect participants in
     the legal system, courts, quasi judicial agencies, and other tribunals are hereby
     mandated to ensure the availability of a qualified sign language interpreter in
     all proceedings involving deaf, without prejudice to the right of the deaf to
     choose other forms or modes of communication, if they so prefer.

     For purposes of this Act, "hearings, proceedings, and transactions" shall
     include those in police stations and before the Lupong Tagapamayapa of the
     Katarungang Pambarangay, as well as preliminary investigations and other
     initial stages in the courts, quasi-judicial bodies, and other tribunals.

     The Supreme Court and other concerned agencies shall promote appropriate
     training for those working in the administration of justice, including hearing
     interpreters, deaf relay interpreters, and other court personnel, police and
     prison staff. Support staff shall also be trained in translation from FSL to written
     English or Filipino.

     The Department of Justice (DOJ), and the Department of the Interior and
     Local Government (DILG), and the Judiciary, with the involvement of the deaf
     community and other stakeholders, are tasked to create a national system of
     standards, accreditation, and procedures for legal interpreting in FSL.

     Section 7. Filipino Sign Language in All Workplaces. ­ The FSL167 shall be the
     official language of the Filipino deaf employed in the civil service and in all
     government workplaces. For this purpose, all government offices shall take
     reasonable measures to encourage the use of FSL among its deaf and hearing
     employees, including the conduct of awareness and training seminars on the
     rationale and use of FSL. The UP168, together with the KWF,169 professional
     linguistics organizations and deaf linguistics researchers, shall formulate
     guidelines for the development of training materials for the employees of the
     DOJ, the Judiciary, the Department of Health (DOH), the Department of Social
     Welfare and Development (DSWD), the Philippine Commission on Women
     (PCW), the Council for the Welfare of Children (CWC), and the Commission on
     Human Rights (CHR), in the conduct of the mandates and activities of these
     concerned offices.

     Section 8. Filipino Sign Language in the Health System. ­ State hospitals and all
     health facilities shall take steps to ensure access of the Filipino deaf to health

     167 FSL: Filipino Sign Language.

     168 UP: University of the Philippines.

     169 KWF: Komisyon sa Wikang Filipino, also referred to as the Commission on the Filipino Language is the official
     regulating body of the Filipino language and the official government institution tasked with developing, preserving,
     and promoting the various local Philippine languages. See
     https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Commission_on_the_Filipino_Language
WHAT IS IT?                                                                              135

services, including the free provision of FSL interpreters and accessible materials
upon request of deaf patients, or individuals who have family members who are
deaf. As part of their corporate social responsibility, private health facilities are
encouraged to provide access to health services to all deaf patients and their
family members.

Section 9. Filipino Sign Language in All Other Public Transactions, Services, and
Facilities. ­ All national agencies including government-owned or ­controlled
corporations (GOCCs), and local government units (LGUs) are hereby directed
to use FSL as the medium of official communication in all public transactions
involving the deaf. Qualified FSL interpreters and accessible materials shall be
provided whenever necessary or requested during fora, conferences, meetings,
cultural events, sports competitions, community affairs, and activities conducted
by government agencies and GOCCs.

Section 10. Filipinos Sign Language in Media. ­ The FSL shall be the language of
broadcast media interpreting. To guarantee access to information and freedom
of expression of the Filipino deaf, the Kapisanan ng mga Brodkaster sa Pilipinas
(KBP), and the Movie and Television Review and Classification Board (MTRCB)
shall, within one (1) year from the effective date of this Act, require FSL interpreter
insets, compliant with accessibility standards for television, in news and public
affairs programs. Subsequently, the MTRCB shall take steps to promote
progressive use of FSL in all other broadcasts and programming, especially in
educational television programs designed for children, in conjunction with the
National Council for Chidlren's Television and the DepEd."170

Law of the People's Republic of China on the Protection of Persons with
Disabilities

Article 43
        The government and society shall take the following measures to enrich
        the spiritual and cultural life of disabled persons:
            1. ...
            2. ...
            3. To launch television programs in Sign Language and special radio
                 programs for disabled persons, and promote the adding of captions
                 or narrations to television columns and film and television works;
            4. ...
            5. ....

Article 55
        Public service institutions and public places shall create conditions to
        provide disabled persons with voice and word hints, Sign Language,
        Braille and other information communication services, and preferential
        and auxiliary services.

        The public transport shall gradually satisfy the requirements for barrier-
        free facilities. Where conditions permit, a public parking lot shall reserve
        parking spaces exclusively for disabled persons.

170 DepEd: Department of Education.
136  SIGN LANGUAGE

     3. Sign language acquisition, and using sign language for education
         and skills training

     The legislation of the following ESCAP member States recognizes the
     importance of sign language acquisition by Deaf children: China; India;
     Malaysia; Marshall Islands; Nepal; Philippines; Republic of Korea.

     For example, India's Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 states the
     following:

             "16. The appropriate Government and the local authorities shall
             endeavour that all educational institutions funded or recognised by
             them provide inclusive education to the children with disabilities and
             towards that end shall--
             ....
             (v) ensure that the education to persons who are blind or deaf or both is
             imparted in the most appropriate languages and modes and means of
             communication."

             In the case of the Marshall Islands, its RIGHTS OF PERSONS WITH
             DISABILITIES ACT, 2015, states the following:

             Part II ­ RIGHTS OF PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES

             §1116. Right to education.
             ...

             (5) Persons with disabilities are entitled to reasonable accommodation
             of their individual needs, including but not limited to:

             (a) physical access to classrooms and other school buildings and
                  acilities, accessible transport, and alternative modes of instruction
                  and educational materials, including Braille and sign language;

             (b) adequate support measures, including learning support 1assistants;
             (c) adjustment of entry requirements, curriculum examinations and pass

                  marks;
             (d) instruction by teachers trained in inclusive education andqualified

                  to teach alternative modes of instruction including Braille and sign
                  language."

     Law of the People's Republic of China on the Protection of Persons with
     Disabilities

     Article 4

             The State shall provide disabled persons with special assistance by
             adopting supplementary methods and supportive measures so as to
             alleviate or eliminate the effects of their disabilities and external barriers
             and ensure the realization of their rights.
WHAT IS IT?                                                                          137

Article 28
        Teachers of special education and Sign Language interpreters shall
        enjoy allowances for special education.

4. Promotion of a system for professional
     sign language interpreting

The following 11 ESCAP member States recognize the importance of sign
language interpreters and a system for delivery of sign language interpretation
services: Bangladesh; China; Japan; Marshall Islands; Mongolia; Nepal;
Philippines; Republic of Korea; Russian Federation; Türkiye; Uzbekistan.
Concerning sign language interpreters, there is a further need for legal
provisions to explicitly recognize the importance of professional training,
certification, accreditation, remuneration according to decent work principles,
as well as ethical standards.

For example, the Korean Sign Language Act has the following provisions that
obligate State and local governments to provide sign language interpretation
and support interpreters:

        "Article 16 (Sign Language Interpretation)

          (1) The State and local governments shall provide sign language
                 interpretation for the deaf, etc. in need of sign language
                 interpretation.

          (2) The State and local governments shall provide sign language
                 interpretation, if deemed necessary with respect to public
                 events; judicial, administrative and other procedures; use of
                 public facilities; public broadcasting; and other cases deemed
                 necessary for public interest.

          (3) The State and local governments shall provide sign language
                 interpretation services so that the deaf, etc. can avoid suffering
                 disadvantages in all job-related activities such as job seeking,
                 vocational training, work, etc.

          (4) The State and local governments shall endeavor to foster
                 manpower specializing in sign language interpretation.

          (5) The State and local governments may establish and
                 operatecenters for sign language interpretation among
                 community rehabilitation facilities for persons with disabilities
                 under Article 58 (1) 2 of the Act on Welfare of Persons with
                 Disabilities."

Other laws underscore a need for designated government entities to manage
the quality of sign language interpretation services and the working conditions
of sign language interpreters.
138  SIGN LANGUAGE

     For example, Türkiye's LAW ON DISABLED PEOPLE AND ON MAKING
     AMENDMENTS IN SOME LAWS AND DECREE LAWS states the following:

             "Additional Article 8 - In order to work as interpreter to the people
             with hearing and speech impairment when needed personnel with
             the knowledge of sign language is assigned. The arrangement of the
             necessary courses are provided for the personnel to learn the sign
             language. The methods and principles regarding the duty and power
             and working conditions of these personnel are determined by the
             regulation to be prepared jointly by the Administration on Disabled
             People and General Directorate of Social Services and Protection of
             Children Agency."

     The Philippine Act has a specific provision on standards for sign language
     interpretating as follows:

             "Section 5. Standards for Filipino Sign Language Interpreting. ­ The KWF,
             with the involvement of the deaf community and other stakeholders, shall
             establish a national system of standards, accreditations, and procedures
             for FSL interpreting, without prejudice to other forms of communication
             which respect the right of a deaf person to accessibility, and to seek,
             receive, impart ideas on an equal basis with others according to their
             choice. This shall include policies on the practice of interpreting as a
             profession such as compensation."

     5. Using technology for accessibility

     The provision of sign language interpretation is a major enabling factor for
     Deaf persons to access information. Other supportive factors include using
     technology to expand the reach of information and communication to Deaf
     persons by providing text, including in close captioning format, and/or
     visual information. This is especially critical in case of emergency need to
     communicate disaster-related alerts and updates. In this regard, 12 ESCAP
     member States have legal provisions: Bangladesh; Fiji; India; Malaysia;
     Marshall Islands; Mongolia; Nepal; New Zealand; Philippines; Republic of
     Korea; Russian Federation; Uzbekizstan.

     India's Right of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 highlights the role of
     government in ensuring that all contents in diverse media are in accessible
     format, including sign language interpretation and close captioning, and the
     importance of universal design of electronic equipment.

             "42. The appropriate Government shall take measures to ensure that,--
             (i) all contents available in audio, print and electronic media are in
             accessible format;
             (ii) persons with disabilities have access to electronic media by providing
             audio description, sign language interpretation and close captioning;
             (iii) electronic goods and equipment which are meant for every day use
             are available in universal design."
WHAT IS IT?                                                                                                              139

The Philippine Act covers, inter alia, the duty of media content producers and
broadcast media interpreting in Filipino Sign Language.

        "Section 10. Filipinos Sign Language in Media. ­ The FSL shall be
        the language of broadcast media interpreting. To guarantee access
        to information and freedom of expression of the Filipino deaf, the
        Kapisanan ng mga Brodkaster sa Pilipinas (KBP), and the Movie and
        Television Review and Classification Board (MTRCB) shall, within one (1)
        year from the effective date of this Act, require FSL interpreter insets,
        compliant with accessibility standards for television, in news and public
        affairs programs. Subsequently, the MTRCB shall take steps to promote
        progressive use of FSL in all other broadcasts and programming,
        especially in educational television programs designed for children, in
        conjunction with the National Council for Chidlren's Television and the
        DepEd.

        The KBP and the MTRCB, the deaf community, and other stakeholders
        are tasked to create a national system of standards, procedures and
        accreditation for broadcast media interpreting in FSL.

        All videos published online, including those on social media, shall also
        conform to Philippine web accessibility standards."

Another factor is that of new technology. The Korean Sign Language Act
highlights the use of information and communication technology in networking
and enabling the provision of remote information and communication services
that benefit Deaf persons.

        "Article 13 (Informatization171 of Korean Sign Language)
        ...
        (2) The State shall establish necessary policies so that everyone can
        use Korean sign language conveniently by utilizing an information
        and communications network such as a remote information and
        communications service network."

6. Research on and promotion of sign language

The laws of the following five Governments contain provisions on research and
promotion of sign language: China, India, Mongolia, Philippines and Republic
of Korea.

Examples are given below that contain more details.

In the Philippine Act, there are three references to research:

        "Section 4. Filipino Sign Language in Education.

171 Informatization refers to the extent by which a geographical area, an economy or a society is becoming infor-
mation-based, i.e., the increase in size of its information labor force. Informatization is also defined as the process
through which new communication technologies are used as a means of furthering development as a nation
becomes more and more an information society.
Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Informatization
140  SIGN LANGUAGE

             (d) Training and Evaluation Programs.
             ...
             The University of the Philippines (UP), together with the Komisyon sa
             Wikang Filipino (WKP), professional sign linguistics and linguistics
             researchers, in collaboration with the CHED and the DepEd, and the
             Early Childhood Care and Development (ECCD) Council, shall develop
             guidelines for the development of training materials in the education of
             the deaf for use by all state universities and colleges (SUCs), as well as
             their teachers and staff.

             Section 7. ­ Filipino Sign Language in All Workplaces.
             ...
             The UP, together with the KWF, professional linguistics organizations
             and deaf linguistics researchers, shall formulate guidelines for the
             development of training materials for the employees of the DOJ, the
             Judiciary, the Department of Health (DOH), the Department of Social
             Welfare and Development (DSWD), the Philippine Commission on
             Women (PCW), the Council for the Welfare of Children (CWC), and the
             Commission on Human Rights (CHR), in the conduct of the mandates
             and activities of these concerned offices.

             Section 11. Promotion of Filipino Sign Language.
             ...
             In coordination with the KWF, SUCs, led by the UP, are directed to
             undertake continuing research for the development, propagation, and
             preservation of FSL and its cultural society."

     Regarding research, the Korean Sign Language Act states the following:

             "Article 6 (Formulation of Basic Plans)

             (1) The Minister of Culture, Sports and Tourism shall formulate and
             implement a basic plan for Korean sign language development
             (hereinafter referred to as "basic plan") via deliberation by Korean sign
             language-related experts, every five years.

             (2) Basic plans shall contain the following:

             ...

             (3) Research of Korean sign language and the standardization of
             terminology in Korean sign language."

     Furthermore, the Korean Sign Language contains an article dedicated to
     research:

     "Article 10 (Research, etc. of Korean Sign Language)

             (1) The Minister of Culture, Sports and Tourism shall conduct continuous
             research of Korean sign language to preserve and develop Korean sign
             language.
WHAT IS IT?                                                                          141

        (2) The Minister of Culture, Sports and Tourism may conduct research
        projects for standardizing terminologies in various fields in Korean sign
        language so that the deaf, etc. can use them easily and conveniently.

        (3) The Minister of Culture, Sports and Tourism may designate a
        specialized institution in order to conduct research under paragraph
        (1) or may entrust such research to research institutes or universities, or
        other specialized institutions deemed necessary."

The Law of the People's Republic of China on the Protection of Persons with
Disabilities, in its Article 29, requires the relevant government departments to
organize and support the research and application of Sign Language:

        The relevant departments of the government shall organize and
        support the research and application of Braille and Sign Language, the
        compilation and publication of special education teaching materials,
        and the research, production and supply of teaching apparatus and
        other auxiliary articles for special education.

The Philippine Act contains an entire section dedicated to the promotion of
the Filipino Sign Language:

        "Section 11. Promotion of Filipino Sign Language. ­ The DepEd,172
        CHED, UP, KWF, Linguistic Society of the Philippines, and other national
        agencies and LGUs shall, in consultation with professional organizations
        with expertise and experience in language policy and planning and the
        deaf community, take appropriate steps to propagate sign language
        competency among hearing people, by offering FSL as an elective
        subject in the regular or mainstream curriculum, particularly of SUCs.

        In coordination with the KWF, SUCs, led by the UP, are directed to
        undertake continuing research for the development, propagation, and
        preservation of FSL and its cultural society."

As in the Philippine Act, the Korean Sign Language Act also has specific
provisions on the promotion of the national sign language:

        "Article 14 (Promotion of Use and Distribution of Korean Sign Language)

        (1) The Minister of Culture, Sports and Tourism shall spread awareness
        of Korean sign language and promote the use of Korean sign language,
        through means such as publicizing Korean sign language by using public
        mass media.

        (2) The Minister of Culture, Sports and Tourism shall execute projects
        necessary for distributing Korean sign language, including the
        development of educationalcourses and texts for the people intending
        to learn Korean sign language and the fosterage of Korean sign language
        teachers.

172 CHED: Commission on Higher Education.
142  SIGN LANGUAGE

             (3) The Minister of Culture, Sports and Tourism may designate a public
             institution or a Korean sign language-related corporation or organization
             as an institute for Korean sign language education to promote the use of
             Korean sign language and distribute it.

             (4) The State may subsidize, within budgetary limits, expenses necessary
             for operating the institutes for Korean sign language education
             designated pursuant to paragraph (3).

             (5) Matters concerning qualification requirements, etc. for Korean sign
             language teachers under paragraph (2) and requirements for designating
             institutes for Korean sign language education under paragraph (3) shall
             be prescribed by Presidential Decree." The Korean Sign Language
             Act provides for the State to pronounce a national day of Korean Sign
             Language to promotes its importance nationwide. The Republic of
             Korea observes this Day on 3 February each year:

             "Article 17 (Day of Korean Sign Language)

             The State may determine the Day of Korean Sign Language and hold
             commemorative events to inspire awareness of Korean sign language."

     7. Meaningful participation of Deaf persons in decision-making
         processes concerning sign language

     Two sign language-specific laws of the Philippines and New Zealand encourage
     consultation with civil society organizations in sign language related decision-
     making processes.

     The New Zealand Act in its principle delineates:

             "(a) The Deaf community should be consulted on matters relating to
             NZSL (including, for example, the promotion of the use of NZSL)."

     The Philippine Act requires responsible parties to consult Deaf organization in
     spreading the implementing rules of the Sign Language Act as follows:

             "... the Philippines to promulgate implementation of the Section 13.
             Implementing Rules and Regulations. ­ The KWF, in coordination with
             the Secretary of Education, the Chairperson of the CHED, the Director
             General of the TESDA, the Chairperson of the PRC, and the Chief Justice
             of the Supreme Court, the Secretary of Justice, and the heads of other
             relevant agencies, and in consultation with the representatives of the
             deaf community, teachers with knowledge and experience with the use
             of FSL in deaf education, the academe, interpreters, and other persons
             concerned, shall promulgate the necessary rules and regulations for the
             effective implementation of this Act within one hundred eighty (180)
             days after its effective date."
WHAT IS IT?                                                                        143

Q6. WHAT OTHER GOVERNMENT
APPROACHES EXIST REGARDING
SIGN LANGUAGE?

The previous section covers reference to sign language in three types of
legislation: constitution; disability law; sign language-specific law.

In addition, there are other approaches, for example:

­ A conducive regulatory, action planning or policy environment for
     recognition of sign language (China; Papua New Guinea);

­ Local government legislation as the starting point, rather than national-
     level legislation (Japan).

­ Sector-specific regulations and laws (China);

China

China has examples of inter-ministerial and inter-sectoral action plans, sectoral
regulations and sectoral legislation that refer to sign language.

Recognition of the importance of sign language as a special language is
contained in two consecutive five-year action plans (National Sign Language
and Braille Standardization Action Plan, 2015-2020; 2021-2025).

The Action Plan (2021-2025) commits to strengthening the legal basis for the
research and promotion of sign language; and promoting

        "the revision of the Law on the Standard Spoken and Written Chinese
        Language, to specify the language rights of people with hearing
        impairment and ... to specify the legal status of National Standard Sign
        Language ..., so as to provide the legal basis to promote and guide the
        use of National Standard Sign Language ...."

Both Action Plans below recognize the importance of sign language as a
special language used by persons with disabilities and an important part of
the officially-recognized languages used by the peoples of China:

1. National Sign Language and Braille Standardization Action Plan (2015-
     2020)

Jointly formulated by the China Disabled Persons' Federation; the Ministry
of Education; the State Language Commission; and the State Administration
of Press, Publication, Radio, Film and Television, the Plan recognizes the
importance of sign language, along with that of Braille:
144  SIGN LANGUAGE

             "Sign language and Braille are special languages used by people with
             hearing impairment and people with visual impairment, respectively,
             and are an important part of national languages."

     2. National Sign Language and Braille Standardization Action Plan (2021-
          2025)

     Jointly formulated by the China Disabled Persons' Federation; the Publicity
     Department of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China;
     the Ministry of Education; the State Language Commission; the Ministry of
     Science and Technology; the Ministry of Industry and Information Technology;
     the Ministry of Culture and Tourism; and the National Radio and Television
     Administration, the Plan recognizes that:

             There are over 30 million people with hearing or visual impairment in
             China. Sign Language and Braille are special languages that they use
             and an important part of national languages.

             Significantly, the following indicates that China is moving towards
             confirming the legal status of Chinese Standard Sign Language in the
             "Law on the Standard Spoken and Written Chinese Language," as
             evidenced in Article 2, Section IV, National Sign Language and Braille
             Standardization Action Plan (2021-2025):

             We will strengthen (the) legal basis for the research and promotion of
             Sign Language and Braille.

             We will promote the revision of the Law on the Standard Spoken and
             Written Chinese Language, to specify the language rights of people
             with hearing impairment and people with visual impairment, and to
             specify the legal status of Chinese Standard Sign Language and National
             Standard Braille, so as to provide the legal basis to promote and guide
             the use of Chinese Standard Sign Language and National Standard
             Braille.

     China has introduced regulations supportive of Deaf persons' access to
     education and to barrier-free environments.

     The following is indicative of recognition of the right of Deaf people to use
     sign language and to receive sign language interpretation services, with other
     related supportive measures.

     Regulations on Education for Individuals with Disabilities

     Article 8

             The families of individuals with disabilities shall assist individuals
             with disabilities in receiving education. The parents or other guardians of
             children and adolescents with disabilities shall respect and guarantee the
             right of children and adolescents with disabilities to receive education,
             actively carry out home education, enable children and adolescents
WHAT IS IT?                                                                          145

        with disabilities to receive in a timely manner rehabilitation training and
        education, assist or participate in the educational and teaching activities
        of the relevant educational institutions, and offer support for children
        and adolescents with disabilities in receiving education."

Note: To enable Deaf children and adolescents to receive education, it may be
expected that the "support" indicated in Article 8 includes Chinese Standard
Sign Language-related learning.

Article 54

        The State encourages scientific research regarding the education
        of persons with disabilities, organizes and supports the research and
        promotion of Braille and Sign Language, and supports the production
        and publishing of special education textbooks."

Regulations on the Construction of Barrier-Free Environments

Article 21

        The television stations established by the people's governments at
        or above the city level with districts shall create conditions to provide
        subtitles when broadcasting television programmes, and broadcast
        news programmes in Sign Language at least once a week.

        Subtitles shall be provided for video products of film and television to
        be published and distributed to the public.

Article 24

        Public service institutions and public places shall create conditions for
        disabled persons to provide information exchange services such as voice
        and text prompts, Sign Language, and Braille, and provide barrier-free
        service skills training for staff.

Furthermore, Deaf persons' access to justice is covered by the following:

       · Regulations on the Construction of Barrier-Free Environments
            (Article 121);

       · Criminal Procedure Law of the People's Republic of China (Article
            121);

       · Law of the People's Republic of China on Penalties for Administration
            of Public Security (Article 86);

       · Guidelines of the Supreme People's Court and China Disabled
            Persons' Federation on Effectively Protecting the Rights of Persons
            with Disabilities amid Law Enforcement and Justice Administration
            (paragraph 22 that stipulates the role of disabled persons'
            federations at all levels in providing sign language interpretation and
            other support for persons with disabilities (including Deaf persons)
            involved in litigation activities).
146  SIGN LANGUAGE

     China has two laws whose provisions highlight the provision of sign language
     support to Deaf persons in the criminal justice system and in the administration
     of public security.

     Criminal Procedure Law of the People's Republic of China

     Article 121

             During the interrogation of a defendant who is deaf or speech-impaired,
             a person who has a good command of Sign Language shall participate,
             and such circumstances shall be noted in the records.

     In criminal cases, the Departments of the Public Security Bureau, People's
     Procuratorate and People's Court will provide funding to ensure that persons
     with hearing impairment can have the services of Chinese Standard Sign
     Language interpreters.

     Law of the People's Republic of China on Penalties for Administration of
     Public Security

     Article 86

            (1) If the person committing an act against the administration of public
                 security, the victim or other witness who is deaf-mute is interrogated,
                 assistance shall be provided by persons who have a good command
                 of the Sign Language, which shall be noted clearly in the written
                 record of the interrogation.

            (2) If the person committing an act against the administration of public
                 security, the victim or other witness who is not familiar with the spoken
                 or written language common in use in the locality is interrogated,
                 interpreters shall be provided, which shall be noted clearly in the
                 written record of the interrogation.

     Paragraph 22

             Disabled persons' federations at all levels should actively cooperate with
             the people's courts in contacting and hiring qualified people to provide
             Sign Language interpretation, Braille and other support for persons with
             disabilities involved in litigation activities.

     Papua New Guinea

     The Papua New Guinea National Policy on Disability, 2015-2025, recognizes
     as a priority (education and training services) the importance of training sign
     language interpreters for ensuring information accessibility.

     Under the related Action Plan, the Strategy for improving access to quality
     services and support programme for persons with disabilities (CBR) includes
     a thrust on facilitating and promoting the use of sign language "... and all
     accessible means, modes and formats of communication." In this regard, it is
WHAT IS IT?                                                                      147

envisaged that by 2025, recognition of sign language as an official language
will be legislated. Along with this expected outcome, the National Policy
indicates an expectation that a deafness education resource unit (DERU) will
be in place.

Japan

Japan recognizes sign language as a language in its Persons with Disabilities
Basic Act. To date, there are no further legal provisions to support Deaf
persons' right to use sign language, either in the abovementioned Act or in
other laws.With the ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons
with Disabilities and as its implementation in Japan progressed, from 2013
onwards prefectures have increasingly adopted ordinances recognizing sign
language as a language. In that regard, Tottori Prefecture was the pioneer with
its historic October 2013 adoption of such an ordinance.173

As of the end of July 2022, a total of 457 ordinances recognizing sign language
as a language have been adopted by prefectural and municipality-level
governments.

Inspired by so many ordinances, petitions calling for national government
adoption of a national law on sign language have been submitted by all
47 prefectural governments and 1,741 municipal councils. In 2022, the Act
on Promotion of Measures concerning Information Access and Use and
Communications was adopted, and its attached resolution included the
following provision:

        "The Government, upon implementing the present Act, shall consider
        the following measures:
        ....

        5. In view of the fact that petitions calling for the adoption of the
        national law on sign language have been submitted by all 47 prefectural
        governments and 1,741 municipal councils, initiate consideration of
        advancing measures on sign language, including the adoption of an act
        on sign language as a language."

173 https://www.jfd.or.jp/sgh/joreimap
148

        Box 15. Deaf participation in local government, Atsuko
        Yanetani (she/her), Deaf woman City Council Member,
        City of Akashi, Hyogo Prefecture, Japan

            In addition to Awaji Fukurou no Sato, Hyogo Prefecture is also renowned for having a
            Deaf person serve as a City Council Member in the City of Akashi. Atsuko Yanetani was
            elected as its member in 2015, and since then she has focused on improving the City's
            welfare policies. Atsuko participates in Council discussions and question-and-answer
            sessions, using Japanese Sign Language via professional Japanese Sign Language
            interpreters.

                                                                                                          Photo: Atsuko Yanetani with the Mayor
                                                                                                                     Photo source: Atsuko Yanetani

            Atsuko's vision is that all citizens, including those with disabilities, receive correct
            information and are able to take action in the event of a disaster. As people in the City of
            Akashi were affected by the 1995 Great Hanshin Earthquake, Hyogo Prefecture, her vision
            reflects that of the people of Hyogo. In addition to Council activities, Atsuko broadcasts
            a weekly video in Japanese Sign Language over the Internet. In the broadcasts, she
            introduces the beauty of Japanese Sign Language, the life of Deaf persons and the City
            of Akashi.
WHAT IS IT?                                                                           149

Conclusion

Sign language is a distinct language. This recognition is enshrined in the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. There are over 200
sign languages spoken around the world by 70 million Deaf persons. Yet,
most hearing people have not been exposed to sign languages and either
misunderstand or have limited knowledge about Deaf persons and sign
languages. Deaf persons remain largely unheard and unseen in Asian and
Pacific societies.

The Asia-Pacific region is rich with social, cultural and linguistic diversity. Sign
language and Deaf culture are important parts of this rich tapestry. Through
explaining in a user-friendly format, the history, distinct elements, and culture
of sign language and Deaf persons as well as the importance of early childhood
learning, education and interpretation, this guide seeks to refute myths and to
begin to answer some of the questions of policymakers, educators, employers
and others.

With this new understanding, policymakers and others should work to integrate
sign language into society. Sign language should be recognized in law as a
language, with specific situations in which the right to use sign language must
be realized, including in the justice system, education, public transportation,
healthcare and media.

Further support is needed to foster the inclusion of Deaf persons. Language
acquisition and using sign language in education and skills training prepare Deaf
persons to participate effectively in society. Parents and educational institutions
need to be provided with resources to foster multilingual environments and
teach sign language. Furthermore, professional interpretation is essential to
Deaf persons overcoming barriers to communication in everyday life. The
availability of professional interpreters through training and accreditation
systems should be promoted and interpretation services provided in public
bodies and private companies. Technology can also play an important role in
accessibility through the provision of information in multiple formats (video,
written, etc.), light and tactile signals, and requiring telecommunication
providers to offer accessible systems.

The meaningful participation of Deaf persons in decision-making processes,
as well as promoting sign language related research, will ensure that policies
have the greatest impact on promoting the inclusion of Deaf persons.

The Sustainable Development Goals pledged to leave no one behind. Sign
language recognition and use is an important factor in ensuring an inclusive
society in which Deaf persons are heard, seen and valued.
150              SIGN LANGUAGE

     References

     Sung-Eun Hong1, Seongok Won1, Il Heo1, Hyunhwa Lee (2018). Raising
     Awareness for a Korean Sign Language Corpus among the Deaf Community.
     LREC 2018 Workshop, Eleventh International Conference on Language
     Resources and Evaluation, 7-12 May 2018, Miyazaki, Japan.
     http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2018/index.html.

     Sung-Eun Hong, Hyunhwa Lee, Mi-Hye Lee and Seung-Il Byun (2019). "The
     Korean Sign Language Act," Chapter 2 in Maartje De Meulder, Joseph J.
     Murray, Rachel L. McKee (2019). The Legal Recognition of Sign Languages:
     Advocacy and Outcomes Around the World. Published: 17 June 2019.
     Publisher: Multilingual Matters, Bristol, U.K..
     https://www.multilingual-matters.com/page/detail/?k=9781788923996

     Statutes of the Republic of Korea (klri.re.kr)

     Publicity Video | National Institute of Korean Language
     https://www.com-sagano.com/jisls/events/2018semina-i-hyonfa.pdf

     United Nations General Assembly (2006). Resolution 61/106, Convention on
     the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, A/RES/61/106 (13 December 2006).
     Available from undocs.org/A/RES/61/106

     World Health Organization (WHO) (2021). Available from https://www.who.int/
     news-room/fact-sheets/detail/deafness-and-hearing-loss
WHAT IS IT?  151
152  SIGN LANGUAGE
WHAT IS IT?                                                            153

             ANNEXES

Annex 1. Laws in Asia-Pacific recognizing sign language as a language
Annex 2. Examples of national measures regarding sign language
154                                                                      SIGN LANGUAGE

     Annex 1
           LAWS IN ASIA-PACIFIC
           RECOGNIZING SIGN
           LANGUAGE AS A LANGUAGE

             1 constitution and 15 Laws in 15 countries in Asia-Pacific

     Member   Name of the                   Year of      Types of      Hyperlink
     States   law                           Recognition  Legislation
                                            of Sign
                                            Language

     1 Bangladesh Rights and                2013         Disability    https://www.ilo.org/
                             Protection of               legislation   dyn/natlex/docs/
                             Persons with                              ELECTRONIC/95795/118013/
                             Disabilities                              F51789448/BGD95795%20
                             Act, 2013                                 Booklet.pdf

     2 China  Law of the                    1990,        Disability    https://www.ilo.org/dyn/natlex/
              People's                      amended      legislation   docs/WEBTEXT/31906/64869/
              Republic of                   2008                       E90CHN01.htm
              China on the
              Protection of
              Persons with
              Disabilities

     3 Fiji   Constitution of 2013                       Constitution  https://www.laws.gov.
              the Republic                                             fj/Home/information/
              of Fiji                                                  constitutionoftherepublicoffiji

              Rights of                     2018         Disability    https://www.un.org/
              Persons with                               legislation   development/desa/disabilities/
              Disabilities Act                                         wp-content/uploads/
              2018                                                     sites/15/2019/12/Fiji_Rights-
                                                                       of-Persons-with-Disabilities-
                                                                       Act-2018.pdf

     4 India  The Rights of                 2016         Disability    https://www.un.org/
              Persons with                               legislation   development/desa/disabilities/
              Disabilities                                             wp-content/uploads/
              Act, 2016                                                sites/15/2019/11/India_Rights-
                                                                       of-Persons-with-Disabilities-
                                                                       Act-2016.pdf
WHAT IS IT?                                                                                 155

     Member   Name of the    Year of      Types of      Hyperlink
     States   law            Recognition  Legislation
5 Japan                      of Sign                    https://www.un.org/
              Basic Act for  Language                   development/desa/disabilities/
6 Malaysia    Persons with                              wp-content/uploads/
7 Marshall    Disabilities   2011         Disability    sites/15/2019/11/Japan_Basic-
                                          legislation   Act-for-Persons-with-Disabilities.
     Islands                                            pdf
8 Mongolia    Physically     2000                       https://elaws.e-gov.go.jp/
              Disabled
9 Nepal       Persons                                   https://www.un.org/
              Welfare Act                               development/desa/disabilities/
10 New                                                  wp-content/uploads/
     Zealand  Persons with 2008,                        sites/15/2019/12/Marshall-
              Disabilities Act amended                  islands_Rights-of-Persons-with-
                                                        disabilities-Act-2015.pdf
                                    2014                https://www.un.org/
                                                        development/desa/disabilities/
              Rights of      2015         Disability    wp-content/uploads/
              Persons with                legislation   sites/15/2019/11/Mongolia_Law-
              Disabilities                              on-human-Rights-of-Persons-
              Act, 2015                                 with-Disabilities.pdf
                                                        https://lawcommission.
              On human       2016         Disability    gov.np/en/wp-content/
              Rights of                   legislation   uploads/2021/01/Constitution-
              Persons with                              of-Nepal.pdf
              Disabilities                              https://www.lawcommission.
                                                        gov.np/en/wp-content/
              Constitution of 2015        Constitution  uploads/2019/07/The-Act-
              Nepal                                     Relating-to-Rights-of-Persons-
                                                        with-Disabilities-2074-2017.pdf
              The Act        2017         Disability
              Relating to                 Recognition   https://www.legislation.govt.
              Rights of                                 nz/act/public/2006/0018/latest/
              Persons with                Sign          whole.html
              Disabilities,               Language
              2074 (2017)                 Law or Act

              New Zealand 2006
              Sign Language
              Act
156                                                              SIGN LANGUAGE

     Member           Name of the      Year of      Types of     Hyperlink
     States           law              Recognition  Legislation
                                       of Sign                   https://www.ncda.gov.ph/
                                       Language                  disability-laws/republic-acts/ra-
                                                                 11106/
     11 Philippines   The Filipino 2018             Sign         https://elaw.klri.re.kr/
                      Sign Language                 Language     eng_mobile/viewer.
                      Act                           Law or Act

     12 Republic of Korean Sign 2015                Sign
                                                    Language
     Korea            Language Act                  Law or Act

     13 Russian       Law on Social    2012         Disability   http://government.ru/activities/
          Federation  Protection of                 legislation  selection/525/29804/
                      Persons with
                      Disabilities in
                      the Russian
                      Federation

     14 Türkiye       Law on           2005         Disability   https://www.un.org/
                      Disabiled                     legislation  development/desa/disabilities/
                      People and                                 wp-content/uploads/
                      on Making                                  sites/15/2019/11/Turkey_Turkish-
                      Amendments                                 Disability-Act-TDA-No.-5378-
                      in Some Law                                of-2005.pdf
                      and Degree
                      Laws

     15 Uzbekistan    The Law of the   2020         Disability   https://lex.uz/docs/5694817
                      Republic of                   legislation
                      Uzbekistan on
                      the Rights of
                      Persons with
                      Disabilities
WHAT IS IT?                                                                             157

Annex 2

EXAMPLES OF NATIONAL
MEASURES REGARDING SIGN
LANGUAGE

1. Sign language-specific legislation: New Zealand,
Philippines, and Republic of Korea

New Zealand Sign Language Act 2006

Version as at 1 July 2022 New Zealand Sign Language Act 2006
Public Act 2006 No 18 Date of assent 10 April 2006

Commencement see section 2 Note

The Parliamentary Counsel Office has made editorial and format changes to this version
using the powers under subpart 2 of Part 3 of the Legislation Act 2019.

Note 4 at the end of this version provides a list of the amendments included in it.

This Act is administered by the Ministry of Social Development.

Contents

1 Title
2 Commencement

                                                 Part 1
                                     Preliminary provisions
3 Purpose
4 Interpretation
5 Act binds the Crown

                                                 Part 2
                                 New Zealand Sign Language

                                            Recognition

6 New Zealand Sign Language to be an official language of New Zealand
7 Right to use New Zealand Sign Language in legal proceedings
8 Effect of recognition

                         Principles to guide government departments
9 Principles
10 Reporting

                                       Miscellaneous provisions
11 Review of operation of Act
12 New Zealand Bill of Rights Act 1990 not affected
158  SIGN LANGUAGE

                                                Regulations
     13 Regulations

                                                Schedule
         Courts and tribunals before which New Zealand Sign Language

                                             may be used
        Notes

     1 Title

     This Act is the New Zealand Sign Language Act 2006.

     2 Commencement

     This Act comes into force on the day after the date on which it receives the
     Royal assent.

                                              Part 1
                                  Preliminary provisions

     3 Purpose

     The purpose of this Act is to promote and maintain the use of New Zealand
     Sign Language by--

       (a) declaring New Zealand Sign Language to be an official language of New
             Zealand; and

       (b) providing for the use of New Zealand Sign Language in legal proceedings;
             and

       (c) empowering the making of regulations setting competency standards for
             the interpretation in legal proceedings of New Zealand Sign Language;
             and

       (d) stating principles to guide government departments in the promotion
             and use of New Zealand Sign Language.

     4 Interpretation

     In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,--
        Deaf community means--
       (a) the distinct linguistic and cultural group of people who are deaf and who
             use New Zealand Sign Language as their first or preferred language; and

       (b) people who are deaf and who identify with the group of people referred
             to in paragraph (a)

        government department means a government department named in Part
        1 of Schedule 1 of the Ombudsmen Act 1975

        interpretation, in relation to New Zealand Sign Language, means--
       (a) the expression in New Zealand Sign Language of words spoken in

             English or Maori or both; and
WHAT IS IT?                                                                            159

  (b) the oral expression in English or Maori or both of messages expressed
        in New Zealand Sign Language

   legal proceedings means--
  (a) proceedings before any court or tribunal named in the Schedule; and
  (b) proceedings before any coroner; and
  (c) proceedings to inquire into and report on any matter of particular

        interest to the Deaf community before--
                (i) a commission of inquiry under the Commissions of Inquiry Act
                     1908; or
                (ii) a tribunal or other body having any of the powersof a
                     commission of inquiry under any other enactment; or
                (iii) an inquiry to which section 6 of the Inquiries Act 2013 applies

        that is required to inquire into and report upon any matter of particular
        interest to the Deaf community
        Minister means, subject to any enactment, the Minister who is, with the
        authority of the Prime Minister, for the time being responsible for the
        administration of this Act
        New Zealand Sign Language or NZSL means the visual and gestural
        language that is the first or preferred language in New Zealand of the
        distinct linguistic and cultural group of people who are deaf
        presiding officer, in relation to any legal proceedings, means the Judge
        or other person who is presiding over the proceedings
        translation, in relation to New Zealand Sign Language, means--

       (a) the written expression in English or Maori or both of messages
             expressed in New Zealand Sign Language; and

       (b) the signed expression in New Zealand Sign Language of words
             written in English or Maori or both.

         Compare: 1987 No 176 s 2
         Section 4 legal proceedings paragraph (c): replaced, on 27 August 2013,
         by section 39 of the Inquiries Act 2013 (2013 No 60)

5 Act binds the Crown

  This Act binds the Crown.

                                         Part 2
                         New Zealand Sign Language

                                           Recognition

6 New Zealand Sign Language to be an official language of New Zealand

   New Zealand Sign Language is declared to be an official language of
   New Zealand.

   Compare: 1987 No 176 s 3 7

7 Right to use New Zealand Sign Language in legal proceedings

(1) In any legal proceedings, any of the following persons may use New
     Zealand Sign Language, where the person's first or preferred language is
     NZSL:
160  SIGN LANGUAGE

           (a) any member of the court, tribunal, or body before which the
                proceedings are being conducted:

           (b) any party or witness:

           (c) any counsel or other person representing a party in the proceedings:

           (d) any other person with leave of the presiding officer.

     (2) The right conferred by subsection (1) to use NZSL does not--

           (a) entitle any person referred to in that subsection to insist that any
                person who is not an interpreter for the purposes of the proceedings
                address or answer him or her in NZSL; or

           (b) entitle any such person other than the presiding officer to require that
                the proceedings or any part of them be recorded in NZSL.

     (3) Where the presiding officer in any legal proceedings is aware that any
          person entitled under subsection (1) to use NZSL in those proceedings
          intends to do so, the presiding officer must ensure that a competent
          interpreter is available.

     (4) Where, in any proceedings, any question arises as to the accuracy of any
          interpretation or translation from NZSL into spoken or written language
          or from spoken or written language into NZSL, the question must be
          determined by the presiding officer in such manner as the presiding officer
          thinks fit.

     (5) Regulations made under this Act and rules of court or other appropriate
          rules of procedure made under any enactment may require any person
          intending to use NZSL in any legal proceedings to give reasonable notice
          of that intention, and generally regulate the procedure to be followed
          where NZSL is, or is to be, used in such proceedings.

     (6) Any such regulations or rules of court or other appropriate rules of
          procedure may make failure to give the required notice a relevant
          consideration in relation to an award of costs, but no person may be
          denied the right to use NZSL in any legal proceedings because of any
          such failure.

           Compare: 1987 No 176 s 4

     8 Effect of recognition

     (1) Subject to section 7, section 6 does not create any legally enforceable
          rights.

     (2) Nothing in section 6 or section 7
          (a) affects any right that any person has, otherwise than by virtue of those
               sections, to seek, receive, or impart any communication in NZSL; or
          (b) affects the right of any other linguistic community in New Zealand
               or the right of any person to use the language of that community or
               person.

           Compare: 1987 No 176 s 5
WHAT IS IT?                                                                                     161

                     Principles to guide government departments
9 Principles

(1) A government department should, when exercising its functions and
     powers, be guided, so far as reasonably practicable, by the following
     principles:
       (a) the Deaf community should be consulted on matters relating to NZSL
            (including, for example, the promotion of the use of NZSL):
       (b) NZSL should be used in the promotion to the public of government
            services and in the provision of information to the public:
       (c) government services and information should be made accessible to
            the Deaf community through the use of appropriate means (including
            the use of NZSL).

(2) Consultation carried out by a government department under subsection (1)
     (a) is to be effected by the chief executive of the government department
     consulting, to the extent that is reasonably practicable, with the persons or
     organisations that the chief executive considers to be representative of the
     interests of the members of the Deaf community relating to NZSL.

(3) The purpose of the principles in subsection (1) is to promote access to
     government information and services for the Deaf community, but nothing
     in subsection (1) is to be read as conferring on the Deaf community
     advantages not enjoyed by other persons.

10 Reporting

(1) The Minister may from time to time report on the progress being made in
     implementing the principles set out in section 9.

(2) A report under subsection1) may be included in any report referred to in
     clause 7 of Schedule 1 of the Pae Ora (Healthy Futures) Act 2022 on the
     progress being made in implementing the New Zealand disability strategy.

      Section 10(2): replaced, on 1 July 2022, by section 104 of the Pae Ora (Healthy Futures)
      Act 2022 (2022 No 30).

                                   Miscellaneous provisions

11 Review of operation of Act

(1) The Minister must, as soon as is practicable, 3 years after the date on which
     this Act comes into force, require a report to be prepared on--
     (a) the operation of this Act since its commencement; and
     (b) whether any amendments to the scope and contents of this Act are
          necessary or desirable.

(2) The Minister must ensure that persons or organisations that are
     representative of the interests of the members of the Deaf community are
     consulted on the matters to be considered in the report.

(3) The Minister must present a copy of the report to the House of
     Representatives.
162                                                        SIGN LANGUAGE

     12 New Zealand Bill of Rights Act 1990 not affected
         Nothing in this Act affects the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act 1990.

                                                 Regulations

     13 Regulations

     (1) The Governor-General may from time to time, by Order in Council, make
          regulations for all or any of the following purposes:

         (a) prescribing the standards of competency that a person who is to act in
              legal proceedings as an interpreter for

         (b) providing for any other matters contemplated by

         (c) this Act or necessary for its administration or necessary for giving it full
              effect.

     (2) Regulations made under subsection (1)(a) must include (or provide, among
          other things, for the determination and publication of) the criteria by which
          the competence of a person to act in legal proceedings as an interpreter
          of NZSL may be assessed.

     (3) Regulations under this section are secondary legislation (see Part 3 of the
          Legislation Act 2019 for publication requirements).

     Legislation Act 2019 requirements for secondary legislation made under this section

     Publication   PCO must publish it on the legislation  LA19 s69(1)(c)
     Presentation  website and notify it in the Gazette
     Disallowance
                   The Minister must present it to the House LA19 s 114, Sch 1 cl 32(1)(a)
                   of Representatives

                   It may be disallowed by the House of    LA19 ss 115, 116
                   Representatives

     This note is not part of the Act.

     Section 13(3): inserted, on 28 October 2021, by section 3 of the Secondary Legislation Act
     2021 (2021 No 7).

                                           Schedule
     Courts and tribunals before which New Zealand Sign Language

                                         may be used

                                                                                                        s4

     · A. Courts
     · The Supreme Court
     · The Court of Appeal
     · The High Court
     · The District Court
     · The Employment Court
     · The Family Court
     · The Youth Court
     · The Maori Land Court
     · The Maori Appellate Court
     · The Environment Court
WHAT IS IT?                                                                                  163

        · B. Tribunals
        · The Waitangi Tribunal
        · The Employment Relations Authority
        · The Human Rights Review Tribunal
        · The Motor Vehicle Disputes Tribunals established under section

             82 (1) of the Motor Vehicle Sales Act 2003
        · The Tenancy Tribunal
        · The Disputes Tribunal established under the Disputes Tribunal Act

             1988

               Schedule: amended, on 1 March 2017, by section 261 of the District Court Act
               2016 (2016 No 49).

Notes

1 General
   This is a consolidation of the New Zealand Sign Language Act 2006 that
   incorporates the amendments made to the legislation so that it shows the
   law as at its stated date.

2 Legal status
   A consolidation is taken to correctly state, as at its stated date, the law
   enacted or made by the legislation consolidated and by the amendments.
   This presumption applies unless the contrary is shown. Section 78 of the
   Legislation Act 2019 provides that this consolidation, published as an
   electronic version, is an official version. A printed version of legislation that
   is produced directly from this official electronic version is also an official
   version.

3 Editorial and format changes
   The Parliamentary Counsel Office makes editorial and format changes to
   consolidations using the powers under subpart 2 of Part 3 of the Legislation
   Act 2019. See also PCO editorial conventions for consolidations.

4 Amendments incorporated in this consolidation
   Pae Ora (Healthy Futures) Act 2022 (2022 No 30): section 104
   Secondary Legislation Act 2021 (2021 No 7): section 3
   District Court Act 2016 (2016 No 49): section 261
   Inquiries Act 2013 (2013 No 60): section 39
164  SIGN LANGUAGE

     B. RA 11106 ­ An Act Declaring The Filipino Sign Language As
     The National Sign Language Of The Filipino Deaf And The Official
     Sign Language Of Government In All Transactions Involving The
     Deaf, And Mandating Its Use In Schools, Broadcast Media, And
     Workplaces

     S.
     No. 1455
     H.
     No. 7503
     Republic
     of the Philippines
     Congress
     of the Philippines
     Metro
     Manila
     Seventeenth
     Congress
     Third
     Regular Session Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the
     twenty-third day of July, two thousand eighteen.

     Republic Act No. 11106

     AN ACT DECLARING THE FILIPINO SIGN LANGUAGE AS THE NATIONAL
     SIGN LANGUAGE OF THE FILIPINO DEAF AND THE OFFICIAL SIGN
     LANGUAGE OF GOVERNMENT IN ALL TRANSACTIONS INVOLVING THE
     DEAF, AND MANDATING ITS USE IN SCHOOLS, BROADCAST MEDIA, AND
     WORKPLACES

     Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
     Philippines in Congress assembled: Section 1. Title ­
     This Act shall be known as "The Filipino Sign Language Act".
     Section

     2. Declaration of Policy. ­ The State shall, in compliance with the United
     Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, promote,
     protect, and ensure the full and equal enjoyment of all human rights and
     fundamental freedoms of persons with disabilities. Thus, national and local
     State agencies shall uphold respect for their inherent dignity, individual
     autonomy, and independence by guaranteeing accessibility and eliminating
     all forms of discrimination in all public interactions and transactions, thereby
     ensuring their full and effective participation and inclusion in society. The State
     shall also take all appropriate measures to ensure that the Filipino deaf can
     exercise the right to expression and opinion. Accordingly, the State recognizes
     and promotes the use of sign languages embodying the specific cultural and
     linguistic identity of the Filipino deaf.

     The State also furthers the vision taken with the Early Years Act (Republic Act
     No.10410) and the Enhanced Basic Education Act (Republic Act No. 10533),
WHAT IS IT?                                                                         165

which have already recognized Filipino Sign Language in the education of the
deaf learners from early childhood up to the secondary level.

Section 3. Filipino Sign Language as the National Sign Language . ­ Filipino
Sign Language, hereinafter referred to as FSL, is hereby declared as the national
sign language of the Philippines. The FSL shall be recognized, promoted,
and supported as the medium of official communication in all transactions
involving the deaf, and as the language of instruction of deaf education,
without prejudice to the use of other forms of communication depending on
individual choice or preference.

Section 4. Filipino Sign Language in Education. ­ (a) Medium of Instruction
and Curriculum. ­ The Department of Education (DepEd), the Commission on
Higher Education (CHED), the Technical Education and Skills Development
Authority (TESDA), and all other national and local government agencies
involved in the education of the deaf, are tasked to henceforth use, and
coordinate with each other on the use of FSL, as the medium of instruction
in deaf education. The FSL shall also be taught as a separate subject in the
curriculum for deaf learners. The reading and writing of Filipino, as the national
language, other Philippine languages, and English shall also be taught to deaf
learners.

(b) Deaf Teachers. ­ To promote the licensing and mobilization of deaf teachers
in formal education as well as alternative learning systems, the Professional
Regulation Commission (PRC) together with teacher education programs
nationwide are directed to employ alternative assessment procedures as
affirmative action measures which shall consider the conditions, abilities, and
social barriers of the deaf teachers. These procedures shall be language-
appropriate and culture-fair to deaf education graduates.

(c) FLS in Teacher Education Programs. ­ In the context of inclusive education
and Universal Design, the learning of FSL shall be a curricular or co-curricular
offering in teacher education programs as deemed appropriate.

(d) Training and Evaluation Programs. ­ All national and local government
agencies and centers providing education to deaf students are hereby tasked
to undertake regular pre-/in-service training and evaluation of their teachers.
These shall be designed and taught in partnership with the representative of
the Filipino deaf community. The University of the Philippines (UP), together
with the Komisyon sa Wikang Filipino (WKP), professional sign linguistics and
linguistics researchers, in collaboration with the CHED and the DepEd, and
the Early Childhood Care and Development (ECCD) Council, shall develop
guidelines for the development of training materials in the education of
the deaf for use by all state universities and colleges (SUCs), as well as their
teachers and staff.

Section 5. Standards for Filipino Sign Language Interpreting. ­ The KWF, with
the involvement of the deaf community and other stakeholders, shall establish
a national system of standards, accreditations, and procedures forFSL
interpreting, without prejudice to other forms of communication which respect
the right of a deaf person to accessibility, and to seek, receive, impart ideas on
166  SIGN LANGUAGE

     an equal basis with others according to their choice. This shall include policies
     on the practice of interpreting as a profession such as compensation rates and
     benefits, working conditions, procedures for grievances and others.

     Section 6. Filipino Sign Language in the Justice System. ­ The FSL shall be
     the official language and legal interpreting for the deaf in all public hearings,
     proceedings, and transactions of the courts, quasi-judicial agencies, and other
     tribunals. To ensure effective access to justice for the deaf on an equal basis with
     others and to facilitate their effective role as direct and indirect participants in
     the legal system, courts, quasi judicial agencies, and other tribunals are hereby
     mandated to ensure the availability of a qualified sign language interpreter in
     all proceedings involving deaf, without prejudice to the right of the deaf to
     choose other forms or modes of communication, if they so prefer.

     For purposes of this Act, "hearings, proceedings, and transactions" shall
     include those in police stations and before the Lupong Tagapamayapa of the
     Katarungang Pambarangay, as well as preliminary investigations and other
     initial stages in the courts, quasi-judicial bodies, and other tribunals.

     The Supreme Court and other concerned agencies shall promote appropriate
     training for those working in the administration of justice, including hearing
     interpreters, deaf relay interpreters, and other court personnel, police and
     prison staff. Support staff shall also be trained in translation from FSL to written
     English or Filipino.

     The Department of Justice (DOJ), and the Department of the Interior and
     Local Government (DILG), and the Judiciary, with the involvement of the deaf
     community and other stakeholders, are tasked to create a national system of
     standards, accreditation, and procedures for legal interpreting in FSL.

     Section 7. ­ Filipino Sign Language in All Workplaces. ­ The FSL shall be the
     official language of the Filipino deaf employed in the civil service and in all
     government workplaces. For this purpose, all government offices shall take
     reasonable measures to encourage the use of FSL among its deaf and hearing
     employees, including the conduct of awareness and training seminars on
     the rationale and use of FSL. The UP, together with the KWF, professional
     linguistics organizations and deaf linguistics researchers, shall formulate
     guidelines for the development of training materials for the employees of
     the DOJ, the Judiciary, the Department of Health (DOH), the Department
     of Social Welfare and Development (DSWD), the Philippine Commission
     on Women (PCW), the Council for the Welfare of Children (CWC), and the
     Commission on Human Rights (CHR), in the conduct of the mandates and
     activities of these concerned offices.

     Section 8. Filipino Sign Language in the Health System. ­ State hospitals and
     all health facilities shall take steps to ensure access of the Filipino deaf to
     health services, including the free provision of FSL interpreters and accessible
     materials upon request of deaf patients, or individuals who have family
     members who are deaf. As part of their corporate social responsibility, private
     health facilities are encouraged to provide access to health services to all deaf
     patients and their family members.
WHAT IS IT?                                                                        167

Section 9. Filipino Sign Language in All Other Public Transactions, Services, and
Facilities. ­ All national agencies including government-owned or ­controlled
corporations (GOCCs), and local government units (LGUs) are hereby directed
to use FSL as the medium of official communication in all public transactions
involving the deaf. Qualified FSL interpreters and accessible materials shall
be provided whenever necessary or requested during fora, conferences,
meetings, cultural events, sports competitions, community affairs, and activities
conducted by government agencies and GOCCs.

Section 10. Filipinos Sign Language in Media. ­ The FSL shall be the language
of broadcast media interpreting. To guarantee access to information and
freedom of expression of the Filipino deaf, the Kapisanan ng mga Brodkaster
sa Pilipinas (KBP), and the Movie and Television Review and Classification Board
(MTRCB) shall, within one (1) year from the effective date of this Act, require
FSL interpreter insets, compliant with accessibility standards for television, in
news and public affairs programs. Subsequently, the MTRCB shall take steps
to promote progressive use of FSL in all other broadcasts and programming,
especially in educational television programs designed for children, in
conjunction with the National Council for Chidlren's Television and the DepEd.
The KBP and the MTRCB, the deaf community, and other stakeholders are
tasked to create a national system of standards, procedures and accreditation
for broadcast media interpreting in FSL.

All videos published online, including those on social media, shall also conform
to Philippine web accessibility standards.

Section 11. Promotion of Filipino Sign Language. ­ The DepEd, CHED, UP,
KWF, Linguistic Society of the Philippines, and other national agencies and
LGUs shall, in consultation with professional organizations with expertise and
experience in language policy and planning and the deaf community, take
appropriate steps to propagate sign language competency among hearing
people, by offering FSL as an elective subject in the regular or mainstream
curriculum, particularly of SUCs.

In coordination with the KWF, SUCs, led by the UP, are directed to undertake
continuing research for the development, propagation, and preservation of
FSL and its cultural society.

Section 12. Instructional Materials for Schools and Child Development Centers.
­ The DepEd Instructional Materials and Council Secretariat shall, in
coordination with the Bureau of Learning Resources and the Bureau of Learning
Delivery, as well as the ECCD Council, develop guidelines for the selection,
production, procurement, and distribution of print and video materials in FSL
to all public schools, day care centers, and national child development centers.
Seventy-five percent (75%) of all procurement contracts shall be reserved for
deaf people's organizations, including regional or provincial enterprises and
cooperatives run by the deaf and recognized by the LGUs.

Section 13. Implementing Rules and Regulations. ­ The KWF, in coordination
with the Secretary of Education, the Chairperson of the CHED, the Director
General of the TESDA, the Chairperson of the PRC, and the Chief Justice of
168  SIGN LANGUAGE

     the Supreme Court, the Secretary of Justice, and the heads of other relevant
     agencies, and in consultation with the representatives of the deaf community,
     teachers with knowledge and experience with the use of FSL in deaf education,
     the academe, interpreters, and other persons concerned, shall promulgate the
     necessary rules and regulations for the effective implementation of this Act
     within one hundred eighty (180) days after its effective date. These rules and
     regulations shall be published in accessible formats in the respective websites
     of the concerned agencies and through other means necessary.

     Section 14. Strict Monitoring and Implementation of this Act. ­ The monitoring
     and implementation of this Act shall be strictly upheld. For this purpose,
     an Inter-Agency Council is hereby created which shall consist of one (1)
     representative each from the CHR, the CWC, the PCW, the KWF and the FSL
     organizations or institutions. The Inter-Agency Council shall make an annual
     report on the monitoring and implementation of this Act and the copy of which
     shall be submitted to both Houses of Congress and published in accessible
     formats in their respective websites and through other means necessary to
     serve the purpose of effective dissemination. Failure to comply with any of
     the provisions of this Act shall be a matter that can be referred to the Civil
     Service Commission, DILG, Sandiganbayan or Office of the Ombudsman or
     other pertinent offices or bodies for appropriate sanctions pursuant to existing
     laws and regulations.

     Section 15. Appropriations. ­ The initial funding of this Act shall be taken from
     the current year's appropriations of the concerned agencies. Thereafter, the
     amount necessary for is continued implementation shall be included in the
     annual General Appropriations Act. Relevant and allowable expenditures
     related to education may also be charged to the ECCD Council, the LGU
     Special Education Fund, or other relevant fund.

     Section 16. Separability Clause. ­ If any provision of this Act is declared
     unconstitutional or invalid, the remaining parts or provisions not affected shall
     remain in full force and effect.

     Section 17. Repealing Clause. ­ All laws executive issuances inconsistent with
     the provisions of this Act are hereby repealed or amended accordingly.

     Section 18. Effectivity Date. ­This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after
     its publication in the Official Gazette or in one (1) newspaper of general
     circulation.
     Approved,
     GLORIA
     MACAPAGAL-ARROYO
     Speaker
     of the House of Representative
     VICENTE
     C. SOTTO III
     President
     of the Senate
WHAT IS IT?                                                                   169

This Act was passed by the Senate of the Philippines as Senate Bill No. 1455
on August 28, 2018 and adopted by the House of Representatives as an
amendment to House Bill No. 7503 on September 10, 2018. DANTE ROBERTO
P. MALING
Acting Secretary General
House of Representatives
170  SIGN LANGUAGE

     C. KOREAN SIGN LANGUAGE ACT

     Act No. 13978, Feb. 3, 2016

     CHAPTER I GENERAL PROVISIONS

     Article 1 (Purpose)

     The purpose of this Act is to improve the right to language and quality of life of
     the deaf and the users of the Korean sign language, by declaring that Korean
     sign language is the inherent language of the deaf, which has the same
     status with the Korean national language, and by laying the foundation for
     development and preservation of Korean sign language.

     Article 2 (Basic Idea)

             (1) Korean sign language is the official language of the deaf of the
                  Republic of Korea.

             (2) The State and the people shall give assistance so that the deaf using
                  Korean sign language can establish their deaf identity and succeed
                  to and develop Korean sign language and deaf culture.

             (3) The deaf and the users of Korean sign language (hereinafter referred
                  to as the "deaf, etc.") shall not be discriminated against in any of
                  the life areas of politics, economics, society and culture (hereinafter
                  referred to as "all life areas") for using Korean sign language, and
                  shall have the right to live a life and be provided with the necessary
                  information required for using Korean sign language in all life areas.

             (4) The deaf, etc. shall have the right to education provided in Korean
                  sign language.

     Article 3 (Definitions)

     The definitions of terms used in this Act shall be as follows:

     1. The term "Korean sign language" refers to an inherent form of
          language created based on a visual and gestural system in the deaf
          culture of the Republic of Korea;

     2. The term "the deaf" refers to the persons with hearing disability
          who use Korean sign language as the everyday language in the deaf
          culture;

     3. The term "user of Korean sign language" refers to a person, other
          than the deaf, who uses Korean sign language as an everyday
          language or auxiliary means due to his/her hearing disability or
          language disorder;

     4. The term "deaf culture" refers to a generic term describing the
          lifestyles based on the deaf identity and a value system as a deaf;

     5. The term "deaf identity" refers to self-identity as a deaf;
WHAT IS IT?                                                                        171

        6. The term "sign language interpretation" refers to conversion of
             Korean sign language into the Korean language or conversion of
             the Korean language into Korean sign language;

        7. The term "public institution, etc." refers to the State, a local
             government, and a public institution under the Act on the
             Management of Public Institutions.

Article 4 (Responsibilities and Obligations of the State and Local
Governments)

(1) The State and local governments shall establish and implement policies
     for improving Korean sign language-using environment for the deaf, etc.,
     such as educating, distributing and publicizing Korean sign language.

(2) The State and local governments shall establish and implement policies
     necessary for establishing the deaf identity of the deaf and fostering deaf
     culture.

(3) The State and local governments shall ensure that the interpretation and
     application of this Act align with the content and purport of the Convention
     on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.

Article 5 (Relationship with Other Acts)

Except as otherwise provided in other Acts, this Act shall apply to Korean sign
language.

CHAPTER II FORMULATION, ETC. OF BASIC PLANS

Article 6 (Formulation of Basic Plans)

(1) The Minister of Culture, Sports and Tourism shall formulate and implement
     a basic plan for Korean sign language development (hereinafter referred to
     as "basic plan") via deliberation by Korean sign language-related experts,
     every five years.

(2) Basic plans shall contain the following:

        1. Basic direction-setting for and execution goals of the policies on
             Korean sign language;

        2. Improving the Korean sign language-using environment for the deaf
             in all life areas;

        3. Research of Korean sign language and the standardization of
             terminology in Korean sign language;

        4. Korean sign language education;
        5. Distribution of Korean sign language;
        6. Korean sign language interpretation;
        7. Fostering Korean sign language-related professional manpower;
        8. Establishing deaf identity and fostering deaf culture;
172  SIGN LANGUAGE

             9. Informatization of Korean sign language;
             10. Exchange and research with respect to Korean sign languages of

                  South and North Korea;
             11. Promoting the private sector's activities for developing Korean sign

                  language;
             12. Enacting and amending the Korean sign language-related statutes;
             13. Other matters necessary for developing Korean sign language.

     (3) When formulating a basic plan, the Minister of Culture, Sports and Tourism
          shall consult in advance with the heads of the relevant central administrative
          agencies.

     (4) The Minister of Culture, Sports and Tourism shall notify the heads of the
          relevant central administrative agencies, and the Special Metropolitan
          City Mayor, Metropolitan City Mayors, the Special Self-Governing City
          Mayor, Do Governors and the Special Self-Governing Province Governor
          (hereinafter referred to as "Mayors/Do Governors"), of the finalized basic
          plan.

     (5) If deemed necessary for establishing a basic plan, the Minister of Culture,
          Sports and Tourism may request public institutions, etc. to submit
          materials necessary for establishing the basic plan, the persons requested
          to submit materials shall comply with such request, except in extenuating
          circumstances.

     (6) Other matters necessary for establishing basic plans shall be prescribed by
          Presidential Decree.

     Article 7 (Formulation, Implementation, etc. of Annual Implementation
     Plans)

     (1) The Minister of Culture, Sports and Tourism, the heads of the relevant
          central administrative agencies and Mayors/Do Governors shall respectively
          formulate and implement implementation plans annually for developing
          Korean sign language (hereinafter referred to as "implementation plan")
          on the basis of the basic plan.

     (2) The heads of the relevant central administrative agencies and Mayors/
          Do Governors shall submit implementation plans for the upcoming year
          and the execution results of implementation plans of the previous year, as
          prescribed by Presidential Decree, and the Minister of Culture, Sports and
          Tourism shall evaluate the execution results of the implementation plans
          every year.

     (3) Matters necessary for the evaluation, etc. of the implementation plans
          shall be prescribed by Presidential Decree.

     Article 8 (Reporting)

     The Government shall finalize and report without delay to the National
     Assembly a basic plan, implementation plans and execution results thereof.
WHAT IS IT?                                                                          173

Article 9 (Investigation of Current Situation)

(1) The Minister of Culture, Sports and Tourism may conduct an investigation of
     current situation concerning the Korean sign language-using environment,
     etc. every three years to promote policies for Korean sign language.

(2) If necessary for conducting investigations of current situation under
     paragraph (1), the Minister of Culture, Sports and Tourism may request
     public institutions, etc. to submit materials or state their opinions. In such
     cases, the persons requested to submit materials or state their opinions
     shall comply with such request, except in extenuating circumstances.

(3) Other matters necessary for conducting investigations of current situation
     concerning the Korean sign language-using environment, etc. shall be
     prescribed by Presidential Decree.

CHAPTER III DEVELOPMENT AND DISTRIBUTION OF KOREAN
SIGN LANGUAGE

Article 10 (Research, etc. of Korean Sign Language)

(1) The Minister of Culture, Sports and Tourism shall conduct continuous
     research of Korean sign language to preserve and develop Korean sign
     language.

(2) The Minister of Culture, Sports and Tourism may conduct research projects
     for standardizing terminologies in various fields in Korean sign language
     so that the deaf, etc. can use them easily and conveniently.

(3) The Minister of Culture, Sports and Tourism may designate a specialized
     institution in order to conduct

research under paragraph (1) or may entrust such research to research institutes
or universities, or other specialized institutions deemed necessary.

Article 11 (Korean Sign Language Education, etc.)

(1) The State and local governments shall create educational environment in
     which the deaf, etc. can improve proficiency in Korean sign language and
     the Korean language.

(2) The State and local governments shall, with respect to educating the
     deaf, etc., devise the policies necessary for the deaf to learn Korean sign
     language from the early stage of disability.

(3) The State and local governments shall ensure that Korean sign language
     is used at schools for the deaf as a teaching and learning language on an
     equal footing with the Korean language.

(4) The State and local governments shall give support so that, with respect to
     education at schools for the deaf, education using Korean sign language
     and study through Korean sign language can be seamlessly realized.
174                                                       SIGN LANGUAGE

     Article 12 (Support for Families of the Deaf, etc.)

     (1) The State and local governments shall establish a system for supporting
          families of the deaf, etc. such as Korean sign language education,
          counselling and related services.

     (2) The State and local governments shall conduct Korean sign language
          education, etc. in order that the parents, etc. who have a child with hearing
          disability can use Korean sign language proficiently.

     Article 13 (Informatization of Korean Sign Language)

     (1) The State shall actively conduct various projects to make it possible to
          produce and utilize knowledge and information through the informatization
          of Korean sign language.

     (2) The State shall establish necessary policies so that everyone can use Korean
          sign language conveniently by utilizing an information and communications
          network such as a remote information and communications service network.

     Article 14 (Promotion of Use and Distribution of Korean Sign Language)

     (1) The Minister of Culture, Sports and Tourism shall spread awareness of
          Korean sign language and promote the use of Korean sign language,
          through means such as publicizing Korean sign language by using public
          mass media.

     (2) The Minister of Culture, Sports and Tourism shall execute projects necessary
          for distributing Korean sign language, including the development of
          educational courses and texts for the people intending to learn Korean
          sign language and the fosterage of Korean sign language teachers.

     (3) The Minister of Culture, Sports and Tourism may designate a public
          institution or a Korean sign language-related corporation or organization
          as an institute for Korean sign language education to promote the use of
          Korean sign language and distribute it.

     (4) The State may subsidize, within budgetary limits, expenses necessary for
          operating the institutes for Korean sign language education designated
          pursuant to paragraph (3).

     (5) Matters concerning qualification requirements, etc. for Korean sign
          language teachers under paragraph (2) and requirements for designating
          institutes for Korean sign language education under paragraph (3) shall be
          prescribed by Presidential Decree.

     Article 15 (Verification of Proficiency in Korean Sign Language)

     (1) The Minister of Culture, Sports and Tourism may verify proficiency in
          Korean sign language to improve and evaluate proficiency in Korean sign
          language.
WHAT IS IT?                                                                         175

(2) Matters necessary for methods, procedures, contents and timing for
     verification of proficiency in Korean sign language under paragraph (1)
     shall be prescribed by Presidential Decree.

Article 16 (Sign Language Interpretation)

(1) The State and local governments shall provide sign language interpretation
     for the deaf, etc. in need of sign language interpretation.

(2) The State and local governments shall provide sign language interpretation,
     if deemed necessary with respect to public events; judicial, administrative
     and other procedures; use of public facilities; public broadcasting; and
     other cases deemed necessary for public interest.

(3) The State and local governments shall provide sign language interpretation
     services so that the deaf, etc. can avoid suffering disadvantages in all job-
     related activities such as job seeking, vocational training, work, etc.

(4) The State and local governments shall endeavor to foster manpower
     specializing in sign language interpretation.

(5) The State and local governments may establish and operate centers for
     sign language interpretation among community rehabilitation facilities for
     persons with disabilities under Article 58 (1) 2 of the Act on Welfare of
     Persons with Disabilities.

Article 17 (Day of Korean Sign Language)

The State may determine the Day of Korean Sign Language and hold
commemorative events to inspire awareness of Korean sign language.
Article 18 (Support for Activities of Civil Organizations, etc.)

The State and local governments may provide necessary support, within
budgetary limits, to corporations, organizations, etc. the purpose of which is
to develop and distribute Korean sign language.

CHAPTER IV SUPPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS

Article 19 (Consultation)

When the head of a central administrative agency intends to enact or amend a
statute containing the content concerning the use of Korean sign language, he/
she shall consult in advance with the Minister of Culture, Sports and Tourism.
Article 20 (Delegation and Entrustment of Authority)

(1) Authority of the Minister of Culture, Sports and Tourism under this Act
     may be partially delegated to Mayors and Do Governors, as prescribed by
     Presidential Decree.

(2) The Minister of Culture, Sports and Tourism may partially entrust business
     affairs under this Act to the relevant institutions and organizations, as
     prescribed by ADDENDA
176  SIGN LANGUAGE

     Article 1 (Enforcement Date)

     This Act shall enter into force six months after this Act enters into force.

     Article 2 Omitted.
     Article 3 (Relationship with Other Statutes)

     References in other statutes to "sign language," "sign language interpretation,"
     or "sign language interpreter" shall be deemed to refer to "Korean sign
     language," "Korean sign language interpretation," or "Korean sign language
     interpreter," respectively, in lieu of the previous provisions.
WHAT IS IT?                                                                       177

2. Conducive regulatory, action planning and legal
environment: China

Official recognition of Sign Language and legal protection of the
right of Deaf people to use Sign Language in China

As early as 1990, the research and use of Chinese Sign Language had been
recognized in the Law of the People's Republic of China on the Protection of
Disabled Persons:

Article 26

        The responsible government departments should organize and support
        the research and use of Braille and Sign Language, the production
        and publication of textbooks for special education, and the research,
        production and supply of teaching aids and other assistive devices for
        special education.

        The abovementioned Law was adopted at the 17th Session of the
        Standing Committee of the Seventh National People's Congress (China's
        legislative body) on 28 December 1990 and amended at the Second
        Session of the Standing Committee of the Eleventh National People's
        Congress on 24 April 2008.

The Standing Committee of the National People's Congress adopted, on
31 October 2000, the "Law on the Standard Spoken and Written Chinese
Language." This Law is about the legal status of language in China; in this law,
sign language is not mentioned. Although it does not explicitly mention Chinese
Standard Sign Language, in practice, concerned administrative departments
recognize its importance and have been promoting its standardization and
use, as evidenced by the issuance of two Action Plans. Both Action Plans
below recognize the importance of sign language as a special language used
by persons with disabilities and an important part of the officially-recognized
languages used by the peoples of China:

1. National Sign Language and Braille Standardization Action Plan
     (2015-2020)

Jointly formulated by the China Disabled Persons' Federation; the Ministry
of Education; the State Language Commission; and the State Administration
of Press, Publication, Radio, Film and Television, the Plan recognizes the
importance of sign language, along with that of Braille:

        "Sign language and Braille are special languages used by people with
        hearing impairment and people with visual impairment, respectively,
        and are an important part of national languages."
178  SIGN LANGUAGE

     2. National Sign Language and Braille Standardization Action Plan
          (2021-2025)

     Jointly formulated by the China Disabled Persons' Federation; the Publicity
     Department of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China;
     the Ministry of Education; the State Language Commission; the Ministry of
     Science and Technology; the Ministry of Industry and Information Technology;
     the Ministry of Culture and Tourism; and the National Radio and Television
     Administration, the Plan recognizes that:

             There are over 30 million people with hearing or visual impairment in
             China. Sign Language and Braille are special languages that they use
             and an important part of national languages.

             Significantly, the following indicates that China is moving towards
             confirming the legal status of Chinese Standard Sign Language in the
             "Law on the Standard Spoken and Written Chinese Language," as
             evidenced in Article 2, Section IV, National Sign Language and Braille
             Standardization Action Plan (2021-2025):

             We will strengthen (the) legal basis for the research and promotion of
             Sign Language and Braille.

             We will promote the revision of the Law on the Standard Spoken and
             Written Chinese Language, to specify the language rights of people
             with hearing impairment and people with visual impairment, and to
             specify the legal status of Chinese Standard Sign Language and National
             Standard Braille, so as to provide the legal basis to promote and guide
             the use of Chinese Standard Sign Language and National Standard
             Braille.

     The following is indicative of legal recognition of the right of Deaf people to
     use sign language and to receive sign language interpretation services, with
     other related supportive measures.

     Law of the People's Republic of China on the Protection of Persons with
     Disabilities

     Article 4

             The State shall provide disabled persons with special assistance by
             adopting supplementary methods and supportive measures so as to
             alleviate or eliminate the effects of their disabilities and external barriers
             and ensure the realization of their rights.

     Article 28

             Teachers of special education and Sign Language interpreters shall
             enjoy allowances for special education.
WHAT IS IT?                                                                           179

Article 29

        The relevant departments of the government shall organize and
        support the research and application of Braille and Sign Language, the
        compilation and publication of special education teaching materials,
        and the research, production and supply of teaching apparatus and
        other auxiliary articles for special education.

Article 43

        The government and society shall take the following measures to enrich
        the spiritual and cultural life of disabled persons:
        1. ...
        2. ...
        3. To launch television programs in Sign Language and special radio

             programs for disabled persons, and promote the adding of captions
             or narrations to television columns and film and television works;
        4. ...
        5. ....

Article 55

        Public service institutions and public places shall create conditions to
        provide disabled persons with voice and word hints, Sign Language,
        Braille and other information communication services, and preferential
        and auxiliary services.

        The public transport shall gradually satisfy the requirements for barrier-
        free facilities. Where conditions permit, a public parking lot shall reserve
        parking spaces exclusively for disabled persons.

Regulations on Education for Individuals with Disabilities

Article 8

        The families of individuals with disabilities shall assist individuals with
        disabilities in receiving education. The parents or other guardians of
        children and adolescents with disabilities shall respect and guarantee the
        right of children and adolescents with disabilities to receive education,
        actively carry out home education, enable children and adolescents
        with disabilities to receive in a timely manner rehabilitation training and
        education, assist or participate in the educational and teaching activities
        of the relevant educational institutions, and offer support for children
        and adolescents with disabilities in receiving education."

Note: To enable Deaf children and adolescents to receive education, it may be
expected that the "support" indicated in Article 8 includes Chinese Standard
Sign Language-related learning.
180  SIGN LANGUAGE

     Article 54

             The State encourages scientific research regarding the education
             of persons with disabilities, organizes and supports the research and
             promotion of Braille and Sign Language, and supports the production
             and publishing of special education textbooks." Regulations on the
             Construction of Barrier-Free Environments

     Article 21

             The television stations established by the people's governments at
             or above the city level with districts shall create conditions to provide
             subtitles when broadcasting television programmes, and broadcast
             news programmes in Sign Language at least once a week.

             Subtitles shall be provided for video products of film and television to
             be published and distributed to the public.

     Article 24

             Public service institutions and public places shall create conditions for
             disabled persons to provide information exchange services such as
             voice and text prompts, Sign Language, and Braille, and provide barrier-
             free service skills training for staff.

     Criminal Procedure Law of the People's Republic of China

     Article 121

             During the interrogation of a defendant who is deaf or speech-impaired,
             a person who has a good command of Sign Language shall participate,
             and such circumstances shall be noted in the records.

     In criminal cases, the Departments of the Public Security Bureau, People's
     Procuratorate and People's Court will provide funding to ensure that persons
     with hearing impairment can have the services of Chinese Standard Sign
     Language interpreters.

     Law of the People's Republic of China on Penalties for Administration
     of Public Security

     Article 86

             (1) If the person committing an act against the administration of public
                  security, the victim or other witness who is deaf-mute is interrogated,
                  assistance shall be provided by persons who have a good command
                  of the Sign Language, which shall be noted clearly in the written
                  record of the interrogation.
WHAT IS IT?                                                                             181

        (2) If the person committing an act against the administration of public
             security, the victim or other witness who is not familiar with the spoken
             or written language common in use in the locality is interrogated,
             interpreters shall be provided, which shall be noted clearly in the
             written record of the interrogation.

Paragraph 22

        Disabled persons' federations at all levels should actively cooperate with
        the people's courts in contacting and hiring qualified people to provide
        Sign Language interpretation, Braille and other support for persons with
        disabilities involved in litigation activities.
182  SIGN LANGUAGE
184  SIGN LANGUAGE
